 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS:  Achondroplasia is characterized by abnormal bone growth that results in short stature with disproportionately short arms and legs, a large head, and characteristic facial features with frontal bossing and mid-face hypoplasia. In infancy, hypotonia is typical, and acquisition of developmental motor milestones is often delayed. Intelligence and life span are usually normal, although compression of the spinal cord and/or upper airway obstruction increases the risk of death in infancy.  DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Achondroplasia can be diagnosed by characteristic clinical and radiographic findings in most affected individuals. In individuals who may be too young to diagnose with certainty or in individuals with atypical findings, molecular genetic testing can be used to detect a mutation in FGFR3. Such testing detects mutations in 99% of affected individuals and is available in clinical laboratories. MANAGEMENT: Recommendations for management of children with achondroplasia include monitoring of height, weight, and head circumference; measures to avoid obesity; MRI or CT for evaluation of severe hypotonia or signs of spinal cord compression; adenotonsillectomy, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) by nasal mask, and tracheostomy to correct obstructive sleep apnea; suboccipital decompression as indicated for lower-limb hyperreflexia or clonus and central hypopnea; surgery to correct spinal stenosis, and educational support in socialization and school adjustment. GENETIC COUNSELING: Achondroplasia is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Over 80% of individuals with achondroplasia have parents with normal stature and have achondroplasia as the result of a de novo gene mutation. Such parents have a low risk of having another child with achondroplasia. An individual with achondroplasia who has a reproductive partner with normal stature has a 50% risk in each pregnancy of having a child with achondroplasia. When both parents have achondroplasia, the risk to their offspring of having normal stature is 25%; of having achondroplasia, 50%; and of having homozygous achondroplasia (a lethal condition), 25%. Prenatal molecular genetic testing is available.