 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Hypochondroplasia is a skeletal dysplasia characterized by short stature; stocky build; disproportionately short arms and legs; broad, short hands and feet; mild joint laxity; and macrocephaly. Radiologic features include shortening of long bones with mild metaphyseal flare; narrowing of the inferior lumbar itnerpedicular distances; short, broad femoral neck; and squared, shortened ilia. The skeletal features are very similar to achondroplasia but usually tend to be milder. Medical complications common to achondroplasia (e.g., spinal stenosis, tibial bowing, obstructive apnea) occur less frequently in hypochondroplasia but deficits in mental capacity and/or function may be more prevalent. Children usually present as toddlers or school-age children with failure to grow; with age, limb disproportion and other features become more prominent.  DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Hypochondroplasia is diagnosed by the recognition of characteristic clinical and radiologic findings that remain controversial. The diagnosis is difficult to make in children under the age of three years, as skeletal disproportion tends to be mild and many of the radiographic features are subtle during infancy. DNA-based testing is available and about 70% of affected individuals are heterozygous for a mutation in FGFR3. However, it is clear that locus heterogeneity exists because mutations in other as-yet unidentified genes can result in similar, if not identical, phenotypes.  MANAGEMENT: Management of short stature in hypochondroplasia is influenced by parental expectations and concerns; one approach is to address these concerns rather than trying to treat the child. Laminectomy relieves symptoms of spinal stenosis; about 70% of individuals experience relief of symptoms following decompression without laminectomy. Developmental milestones are followed closely during early childhood so that mental deficiencies are addressed with special educational programs. GENETIC COUNSELING: Hypochondroplasia is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. It is assumed that the majority of new cases result from spontaneous mutations and that the unaffected parents of a child with hypochondroplasia have an extremely low risk (<0.01%) of having another affected child. An individual with hypochondroplasia who has a partner of average stature has a 50% risk of having a child with hypochondroplasia. If an affected individual's partner also has hypochondroplasia (or another dominant form of skeletal dysplasia), genetic counseling becomes more complicated because of the high incidence of genetic heterogeneity and the lack of medical literature addressing these circumstances. Prenatal molecular genetic testing is available if the mutation(s) in the parent(s) with hypochondroplasia have been identified; however, requests for prenatal testing for conditions such as heterozygous hypochondroplasia are not common. 