Mutations in the gene for human fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (hFGFR3) cause a variety of skeletal dysplasias, including the most common genetic form of dwarfism, achondroplasia (ACH). Evidence indicates that these phenotypes are not due to simple haploinsufficiency of FGFR3 but are more likely related to a role in negatively regulating skeletal growth. The effects of one of these mutations on FGFR3 signaling were examined by constructing chimeric receptors composed of the extracellular domain of human platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (hPDGFR beta) and the transmembrane and intracellular domains of hFGFR3 or of an ACH (G375C) mutant. Following stable transfection in PC12 cells, which lack platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptors, all clonal cell lines, with either type of chimera, showed strong neurite outgrowth in the presence of PDGF but not in its absence. Antiphosphotyrosine immunoblots showed ligand-dependent autophosphorylation, and both receptor types stimulated strong phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase, an event associated with the differentiative response of these cells. In addition, ligand-dependent phosphorylation of phospholipase Cgamma and Shc was also observed. All of these responses were comparable to those observed from ligand activation, such as by nerve growth factor, of the native PC12 cells used to prepare the stable transfectants. The cells with the chimera bearing the ACH mutation were more rapidly responsive to ligand with less sustained MAPK activation, indicative of a preactivated or primed condition and consistent with the view that these mutations weaken ligand control of FGFR3 function. However, the full effect of the mutation likely depends in part on structural features of the extracellular domain. Although FGFR3 has been suggested to act as a negative regulator of long-bone growth in chrondrocytes, it produces differentiative signals similar to those of FGFR1, to which only positive effects have been ascribed, in PC12 cells. Therefore, its regulatory effects on bone growth likely result from cellular contexts and not the induction of a unique FGFR3 signaling pathway.