INTRODUCTION: To test the feasibility and safety of a minimally invasive technique, we report our experience in treating spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) patients by using frameless stereotactic clot aspiration-thrombolysis and its effects on their 30-day survival. We compared the observed cohort mortality with its predicted 30-day ICH mortality, by using previously validated methods. METHODS: Selection criteria were diagnosis of hypertensive ICH > or =35 cc, reduced level of consciousness, and no brainstem compression. Frameless stereotactic puncture/clot aspiration followed by intraclot external catheter placement was performed. Two milligrams of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) was administered q12 hours until ICH volume < or =10 cc, or the catheter fenestrations were no longer in continuity with the clot. RESULTS: Fifteen patients were treated, mean age was 60.7 years. Hemorrhage locations included basal ganglia (13), thalamic (1), and lobar (1); mean systolic blood pressure; and admission ICH volumes were 229.3 mmHg and 59.1 cc, respectively. Median time from ictus to clot aspiration/thrombolysis was 1 (range 0-3) day. Mean hematoma volume was reduced to 17% of pretreatment size. Complications were ventriculitis (6.6%) and clot enlargement (13.3%). Two patients were dead at 30 days. Median Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) scores were 10.5 (4-15) at admission and 11.0 (3-15) at discharge. By using the most conservative estimate for analysis, probability of observing two or fewer deaths among 15 patients with an overall probability of dying calculated at 0.33 was p = 0.079. CONCLUSIONS: In this selected cohort of patients with ICH, stereotactic aspiration and thrombolytic washout seemed to be feasible and to have a trend towards improved 30-day survival, when using their predicted mortality data as "historical control." Complications did not exceed expected incidence rates. Based on the experience presented here as well as previous similar reports, a larger, randomized study addressing dose escalation, patient selection, and best therapeutic window is needed.