INTRODUCTION: Our university hospital serves a population of 300 000 inhabitants. Stroke is the leading cause of admission in our department of neurology. In June 2003, when the Emergency Department (ED) was closed in our institution, was created an acute stroke network (ASN), comprising 2 beds of direct admission and thrombolysis in the intensive care unit, and 4 beds dedicated to stroke care in the department of neurology, in which standardized stroke care protocols were implemented. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate changes in stroke care related to the creation of the ASN in terms of delays of arrival, imaging, use of intravenous (IV) thrombolysis, and outcome of patients. We conducted a prospective study during 18 months to evaluate characteristics of patients admitted with suspected stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA) in the newly created ASN and to assess conditions of treatment with IV thrombolysis in terms of safety and efficacy. We also compared the outcome data before and after the creation of the ASN. METHODS: For each patient admitted in our hospital for suspected stroke or TIA, were prospectively collected clinical and outcome data (age, mode of transport, delay of arrival after the onset of symptoms (OS), treatment with IV thrombolysis, outcome and discharge). This study was conducted in the ED during six months in 2002, and in the ASN during 18 months, for all patients admitted for stroke. RESULTS: Three hundred and sixty four patients were admitted in the ASN. Emergency medical services (EMS) were used in half of cases for transport, and median delay of admission after the OS was 2h and 52 min. Median delay of imaging was 1 h and 45 min. Seventeen patients (8.5 p. 100 of ischemic stroke patients) were treated with IV thrombolysis, with an initial good outcome in 9 patients, 7 with a dramatic recovery). The main reason for therapeutic abstention for untreated patients admitted in the first 3 hours was a mild deficit with a NIHSS<6. Compared with the previous management in the ED, patients in the ASN were younger, had more severe neurological symptoms, the EMS transport was the main mode of transport (versus used in 17 p. 100 of cases in 2002), and the delay of admission was significantly lower: 2 h 52 versus 5 h 10 (p<0.02). After adjustment on the main predictive factors, only patients with hemorrhagic strokes had a better outcome after the creation of the ASN. CONCLUSIONS: Creation of an ASN was associated with a significant decrease of admission and imaging delays, due to a strong collaboration with EMS, and with a better outcome for hemorrhagic stroke patients. Treatment with intravenous thrombolysis in the first 3 hours could be used widely and was efficient and safe. However, the creation of dedicated stroke units for all stroke patients remains necessary to improve quality of care and outcome.