Anticoagulation is recommended in the acute phase of cerebral venous thrombosis in adults, then for 3-12 months. In children, 2 consensus reports published in 2008 also recommend use of anticoagulants, whereas conclusions diverge for newborns. These consensus reports are based on observational studies, authors' experience, and comparisons with adult pathology. In view of the original studies published since then, the French Society of Pediatric Neurology (Société française de neurologie pédiatrique [SFNP]) wished to update the level of evidence and the knowledge in this domain. The results from the analysis of the literature show that anticoagulation is widely used in pediatrics. It is well-tolerated in children (class I, level of evidence B) and probably in the newborn (class IIa, level of evidence B). In the acute phase of cerebral venous thrombosis, anticoagulation is probably effective in reducing the risk of death in children (class IIa, level of evidence B). It is not possible to draw a conclusion on newborns (class IIb). Over the longer term, anticoagulation is effective in reducing the risk of recurrence (class I, level of evidence B). Since this risk is highly dependent on a number of individual factors (the main ones being the child's age, the cause of the thrombosis, and the kinetics of the sinus recanalization), the duration of anticoagulation should be analyzed individually (class I, level of evidence B). All in all, the convergence of the results, the physiopathologic arguments, and the concordance with the data on adult patients has led to the following recommendations: in the absence of a contra-indication, it is reasonable to propose anticoagulation in the acute phase of cerebral venous thrombosis in children. Prolonging this treatment for 3-6 months is indicated depending on the number of individual factors. In the absence of a contra-indication, anticoagulation may be considered individually in the acute phase of cerebral venous thrombosis in newborns for 6-12 weeks.