Oral administration of clinical-type high molecular weight urokinase (HMW-UK) in a single dose of 30,000-60,000 International Units (IU) in enteric-coated capsules, in a group of normal human subjects, induced a plasma fibrinolytic state suggesting transport of HMW-UK across the intestinal tract. Other groups of human subjects were given a single dose of 120,000 IU daily of pure HMW-UK for 1 d and 7 d together with a placebo dose, all of the ingredients except urokinase (UK), daily for 7 d. UK-type proteins were isolated from the plasma of blood samples drawn 6 h after administration of the final dose, by a sequential two-step affinity chromatography method first with [N alpha-(epsilon-aminocaproyl)-DL-homoarginine hexylester]-Sepharose and second with a specific rabbit anti-HMW-UK-IgG-Sepharose. The yield of UK-type proteins from the 7-d group, 0.79 mg/dl, was approximately twofold greater than that obtained from either the placebo or 1-d groups. The specific plasminogen activator activity of the 1-d and 7-d groups were similar, 508 and 537 IU/mg protein, respectively; negligible plasminogen activator activity could be detected in the placebo group. The kinetics of activation parameters of human Glu-plasminogen of the UK-type protein, isolated from the 1-d group, were similar to those obtained with urinary HMW-UK. The UK-type proteins isolated only from the 7-d group showed, in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, a major protein band of molecular weight 53,000 in the same position as HMW-UK. In addition, two other major protein bands of approximately 140,000 and approximately 120,000 mol wt were found in the 7-d placebo-, and 1-d groups, and also in the 7-d group. The 53,000 mol wt protein, about 50% of the total protein in the 7-d group, was further purified by preparative SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and found to be a two-chain protein with a specific activity of 1,241 IU/mg protein. The protein showed common antigenic determinants with urinary HMW-UK. The oral administration of 120,000 IU HMW-UK to human subjects for 7 d stimulated the synthesis of a UK-type protein of 53,000 mol wt, probably the zymogen, from either the liver or vascular endothelium, which was released into the circulation, and converted into active UK by circulating plasmin. The induction of the fibrinolytic state produced the conversion of native circulating Glu-plasminogen into the degraded Lys-plasminogen form, which was found in large amounts in the plasma of the 7-d group. The new plasma components, e.g., the 53,000-mol wt UK-zymogen and Lys-plasminogen, could play an important role in clot resolution of the fibrin-thrombus in thromboembolic diseases. Oral administration of HMW-UK has been shown to be clinically effective in patients with cerebral thrombosis in a multicenter double blind study.