 OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of short-wavelength automated perimetry (SWAP) in the assessment of patients with neuro-ophthalmologic disorders, especially optic neuropathies. METHODS: A modified Humphrey field analyzer was used to perform standard automated perimetry and SWAP, a technique that isolates the activity of short-wavelength-sensitive ("blue") mechanisms. Forty patients (80 eyes) were evaluated by SWAP and standard automated perimetry. Thirteen patients (26 eyes) had recovered from optic neuritis and/or multiple sclerosis, 15 (30 eyes) were in various stages of treatment for pseudotumor cerebri, and 12 (24 eyes) had other miscellaneous neuro-ophthalmologic conditions. Six additional patients (12 eyes) with neuro-ophthalmologic conditions were tested twice on different days during a 2-week period, with the order of SWAP and standard perimetric testing being reversed on the second day. RESULTS: Of the 80 eyes tested, 38 (48%) had SWAP visual fields that were worse than standard automated perimetry results; 29 (36%) showed no difference between standard and SWAP visual fields; and 13 (16%) had standard automated perimetry results that were worse than SWAP visual fields. Of the 26 eyes in patients with optic neuritis and/or multiple sclerosis, 15 (58%) had SWAP results that were worse than standard visual fields. Ten (33%) of the 30 eyes with pseudotumor cerebri had SWAP results worse than standard automated perimetry results, and 13 (54%) of 24 eyes with miscellaneous neuro-ophthalmologic conditions had SWAP results worse than standard automated perimetry results. For the 12 eyes undergoing repeated testing, SWAP visual fields were worse when they were performed last, perhaps indicating that some fatigue effect was present. This was observed for standard visual fields as well, but to a smaller extent. CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary findings suggest that SWAP may be useful in detecting certain neuro-ophthalmologic deficits more readily than standard automated visual field testing, especially for optic neuritis and multiple sclerosis. Further evaluations will be necessary to define the effects of fatigue for SWAP visual fields in neuro-ophthalmologic disorders.