OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between admission serum concentrations of the actin-scavenger, Gc-globulin, and the subsequent development of multiple organ failure in patients with fulminant hepatic failure. DESIGN: Retrospective study. SETTING: A hepatologic intensive care unit. PATIENTS: Seventy-nine patients with hepatic encephalopathy grade 3 or 4. INTERVENTIONS: None. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Serum admission concentrations of both total and nonactin-complexed (free) Gc-globulin were determined. The development of cardiovascular failure, renal failure, pulmonary failure, intracranial hypertension, and infections were recorded in each patient. Both total and free Gc-globulin values were significantly lower in the patients, compared with normal controls. The Gc-globulin values were significantly reduced in patients who subsequently developed cardiovascular failure (p < .01), intracranial hypertension (p < .001), and infections (p < .001), compared with those patients who did not. No differences were found between patients with and without pulmonary or renal failure. Patients with total Gc-globulin values in the lowest quintile had on average 2.6 organ failures, whereas patients with Gc-globulin concentrations in the highest quintile had 0.9 organ failures. The corresponding figures for the lowest and highest quintiles of free Gc-globulin were 3.0 and 1.1 organ failures, respectively. Both total and free Gc-globulin were inversely correlated to the number of organ failures (p < .005 in both cases). Patients with multiple organ failure (> or = 2 organ failures) had significantly reduced Gc-globulin values compared with patients without multiple organ failure (p < .0001). CONCLUSIONS: In patients with fulminant hepatic failure, the lowest admission Gc-globulin concentrations were associated with the subsequent development of cardiovascular failure, intracranial hypertension, and infections. Lack of Gc-globulin correlated significantly with the development of multiple organ failure and may be pathogenetically involved in this condition.