BACKGROUND: Oxidation and/or free radical reactions after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) may be involved in the development of chronic cerebral vasospasm. The inhibition of these reactions is thought to be one of the therapeutic strategies for prevention of cerebral vasospasm. We investigated the effect of Ebselen, a synthetic seleno-organic compound, which exhibits anti-oxidation by glutathione peroxidaselike activity to inhibit free radical reactions by lipid peroxidation on the development of chronic cerebral vasospasm in a primate model. METHODS: Seventeen monkeys were used. SAH was produced by introduction of a blood clot around the right middle cerebral artery and the right side of the circle of Willis in all animals. The monkeys were randomly divided into three groups according to Ebselen dosage: 1) no dosage or non-treated group; 2) high-dose Ebselen group; and 3) low-dose Ebselen group. The drug was administered at 10 mg/Kg in the high-dose group and 5 mg/Kg in the low-dose group twice a day in each group for 7 days after SAH. The vessel diameter was evaluated on angiograms before the induction of SAH and at Day 7 following SAH. RESULTS:In the untreated group, the angiograms showed significant (p < 0.05) reductions of the mean vessel caliber of the right internal carotid (ICA) (38 +/- 10% reduction) and the middle cerebral artery (MCA) (56 +/- 9.7%) compared with the baseline value before SAH. In the high-dose Ebselen-treated group, the mean percent reduction in vessel caliber of the right ICA (16 +/- 11%) and MCA (28 +/- 9.5%) on Day 7 angiograms were significantly (p < 0.05) lower than those in the nontreated group, whereas the mean percent reduction of these vessels in the low-dose Ebselen-treated group showed no significant difference compared with the untreated group. CONCLUSIONS: Chronic cerebral vasospasm was inhibited in the animals in which a relatively large amount of Ebselen was administered for 7 days after SAH. The results suggest that the oxidation or free radical reaction by lipid peroxidation after SAH might be involved in the pathogenesis of vasospasm, and that inhibition of these reactions by drugs, such as Ebselen, may have a promising effect for prevention of vasospasm.