BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: It remains controversial whether the intra-arterial administration of papaverine (IAP) is effective in reversing vasospasm-associated cerebral hypoperfusion after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. The aim of the present study was to continuously assess regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) during and after IAP with the use of quantitative, bedside thermal diffusion flowmetry. METHODS: Eight patients with cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage (mean flow velocity >120 cm/s; angiographic vessel constriction >33%; hemispheric cerebral blood flow [CBF] <32 mL/100 g per minute) were prospectively entered into the study. Before IAP, thermal diffusion microprobes were implanted into the white matter of each affected vascular territory (n=10) for rCBF monitoring. During and after IAP (300 mg papaverine/50 mL saline over 1 hour), mean arterial blood pressure, intracranial pressure, cerebral perfusion pressure, thermal diffusion rCBF (TD-rCBF), and cerebrovascular resistance (CVR) were recorded continuously. RESULTS: IAP significantly increased TD-rCBF from 7.3+/-1.6 to 37.9+/-6.6 mL/100 g per minute (mean+/-SEM), indicating reversal of cerebral hypoperfusion. This TD-rCBF response was dependent on the degree of cerebral vasospasm and reduced perfusion within the vascular territory. Long-term analysis of TD-rCBF, however, demonstrated that this beneficial effect of IAP on cerebral hypoperfusion was only transient: within 3 hours after treatment, TD-rCBF and CVR returned to baseline values. Furthermore, a lack of correlation between transcranial Doppler sonography and thermal diffusion flowmetry suggested that transcranial Doppler sonography is not suited for CBF-based neuromonitoring after IAP. CONCLUSIONS: IAP is not effective in permanently reversing cerebral hypoperfusion in patients with cerebral vasospasm. The need to validate alternative therapeutic strategies that seek to improve cerebral perfusion in vasospasm warrants continued development of CBF-based neuromonitoring strategies.