OBJECTIVE: Endothelin-mediated vasoconstriction has been implicated in the pathophysiology of cerebral vasospasm after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Endothelin-1, the most potent vasoconstrictor peptide of the endothelin family, is synthesized initially as a large prepropeptide that requires multiple steps of post-translational processing for activation. The final step of this processing involves the proteolytic cleavage of a relatively inactive precursor, big endothelin-1, by the metalloprotease endothelin-converting enzyme. Previous findings have demonstrated that intravenous bolus injections of an endothelin-converting enzyme inhibitor (CGS 26303) administered twice daily can prevent and reverse arterial narrowing in a rabbit model of SAH. However, attenuation of vasospastic response was incomplete and required relatively high doses to be effective in reversing vasospasm. Therefore, the present study evaluated an alternative protocol for administration of CGS 26303 to optimize the antispastic influence of this compound. METHODS: Continuous intravenous infusion of CGS 26303 at doses of 2.4, 8.0, or 24.0 mg/kg/d was initiated either 1 hour (prevention paradigm) or 24 hours (reversal paradigm) after experimental SAH in New Zealand White rabbits. All animals were killed by perfusion-fixation 48 hours after SAH. Basilar arteries were then removed and sectioned, and their cross-sectional areas were measured by use of computer-assisted video microscopy. RESULTS: Continuous intravenous infusion of CGS 26303 attenuated SAH-induced cerebral vasospasm in a dose-dependent manner in both the prevention and the reversal groups. These effects achieved statistical significance at all doses as compared with the SAH-only or SAH-plus-vehicle groups. Furthermore, the attenuation of vasospasm after continuous infusion of CGS 26303 was more efficacious than that obtained with bolus injections. CONCLUSION: These findings provide further support for the use of endothelin-converting enzyme inhibition as a therapeutic strategy for reduction of cerebral vasospasm, and they also support the effectiveness of this strategy even when initiated after arterial narrowing has been established. The findings also indicate that continuous intravenous infusion of CGS 26303 is a more effective approach for attenuation of vasospasm than bolus intravenous administration.