OBJECT: The value of transcranial Doppler ultrasonography for the detection of middle cerebral artery (MCA) spasm has been asserted. None of the published studies, however, has adequately scrutinized the overall diagnostic accuracy of this procedure. There are only sporadic reports concerning the utility of transcranial color Doppler (TCCD) ultrasonography, although this method has been proved to be more precise. In this study the authors attempted to estimate the performance of TCCD ultrasonography in detecting MCA narrowing by using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, based on TCCD studies obtained in a relatively large, randomly selected population of patients. METHODS: Transcranial color Doppler ultrasonography studies were obtained in 100 consecutive patients (54 men and 46 women ages 18-74 years, median age 50 years) routinely referred by neurosurgeons for intraarterial angiography. The M1 segment of the MCA was insonated using a 2.5-MHz probe via a temporal acoustic window, and angle-corrected flow velocities were obtained. Angiographically depicted vasospasm was graded as none, mild (< or = 25% vessel caliber reduction), and moderate to severe (> 25% vessel caliber reduction). The effectiveness of TCCD ultrasonography in diagnosing MCA spasm was evaluated by calculating the areas under the ROC curves (Az). Of the 200 MCAs examined, 173 were successfully visualized with the aid of TCCD ultrasonography. Mild vasospasm was angiographically diagnosed in 15 arteries and moderate-to-severe vasospasm in 28. The best-performing TCCD parameter for the detection of MCA narrowing was revealed to be peak systolic velocity. The Az value for moderate-to-severe vasospasm only was 0.93 and that for all vasospasms was 0.8. The best efficiency, that is, the optimal tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity in diagnosing vasospasms, was associated with a peak systolic velocity of 182 cm/second. CONCLUSIONS: The performance of TCCD ultrasonography in the diagnosis of advanced MCA narrowing is very good, and is acceptable for all vasospasms. The best-performing parameter was peak systolic velocity.