Thirty patients admitted after suffering closed head injuries, with Glasgow Coma Scale scores ranging from 3 to 15, were evaluated with transcranial Doppler ultrasound monitoring. Blood flow velocity was determined in the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and the intracranial portion of the internal carotid artery (ICA) in all patients. Because proximal flow in the extracranial ICA declines in velocity when arterial narrowing becomes hemodynamically significant, the extracranial ICA velocity was concurrently monitored in 19 patients. To assess cerebral perfusion, cerebral blood flow (CBF) measurements obtained with the intravenous 133Xe technique were completed in 16 patients. Vasospasm, designated as MCA velocity exceeding 120 cm/sec, was found in eight patients (26.7%). Severe vasospasm, defined as MCA velocity greater than 200 cm/sec, occurred in three patients, and was confirmed by angiography in all three. Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) was documented by computerized tomography in five (62.5%) of the eight patients with vasospasm. All cases of severe vasospasm were associated with subarachnoid blood. The time course of vasospasm in patients with traumatic SAH was similar to that found in patients with aneurysmal SAH; in contrast, arterial spasm not associated with SAH demonstrated an uncharacteristically short duration (mean 1.25 days), suggesting that this may be a different type of spasm. A significant correlation (p less than 0.05) was identified between the lowest CBF and highest MCA velocity in patients during the period of vasospasm, indicating that arterial narrowing can lead to impaired CBF. Ischemic brain damage was found in one patient who had evidence of cerebral infarction in the territories supplied by the arteries affected by spasm. These findings demonstrate that delayed cerebral arterial spasm is a frequent complication of closed head injury and that the severity of spasm is, in some cases, comparable to that seen in aneurysmal SAH. This experience suggests that vasospasm is an important secondary posttraumatic insult that is potentially treatable.