OBJECTIVE: To observe the variation of endothelin (ET) and nitric oxide (NO) in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in rabbits, and evaluate the effects of tetramethylpyrazine (TMP) on the prevention and cure of cerebral vasospasm (CVS) after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). METHODS: 24 New Zealand rabbits were randomly assigned into three groups: contrast group, experiment group and blank group. Every group contained 8 rabbits. SAH was established according to inject blood into the cisterna magna. The experiment group was administrated with TMP (20 mg/kg x d) transperitoneally. ET and NO of plasma and CSF were detected by radical immunoassay at 72 h and 168 h after SAH. Neurofunction were detected in every group at all the time scales. RESULTS: (1) After SAH, the level of ET in CSF increased significantly in contrast group compared with that in experiment and blank groups (P<0.05). The value of ET at 168 h was higher than that at 72 h. The level of ET in plasma increased significantly in contrast group compared with blank and experiment groups (P<0.05), and no significant contrast could be found between blank and experiment group. (2) After SAH, the value of NO in CSF was lower in contrast group than in other groups (P<0.05), and the level of NO in CSF continued to decrease in all groups on some extent. As time went by, no significant contrast could be found in all groups. The value of NO in plasma was lower in contrast group than in other groups (P<0.05). There was no significant difference between experiment and blank groups. (3) The neuro-function score continued to be increased in contrast group, but decreased in experiment one. The neuro-function score was lower in experiment group than in contrast one at every time point (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: After administration of TMP, the variation of ET has the continued decrease in plasma and CSF; the variation of NO shows the continued increase in plasma and CSF; neurological function gets possibly protected. TMP may prevent from and cure CVS after SAH.