OBJECT: One mechanism that contributes to cerebral vasospasm is the impairment of potassium channels in vascular smooth muscles. Adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel openers (PCOs) appear to be particularly effective for dilating cerebral arteries in experimental models of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). A mode of safe administration that provides timed release of PCO drugs is still a subject of investigation. The authors tested the efficacy of locally delivered intrathecal cromakalim, a PCO, incorporated into a controlled-release system to prevent cerebral vasospasm in a rat model of SAH. METHODS: Cromakalim was coupled to a viscous carrier, hyaluronan, 15% by weight. In vitro release kinetics studies showed a steady release of cromakalim over days. Fifty adult male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 350-400 g each were divided into 10 groups and treated with various doses of cromakalim or cromakalim/hyaluronan in a rat double SAH model. Treatment was started 30 minutes after the second SAH induction. Animals were killed 3 days after treatment, and the basilar arteries were processed for morphometric measurements and histological analysis. RESULTS: Controlled release of cromakalim from the cromakalim/hyaluronan implant at a dose of 0.055 mg/kg significantly increased lumen patency in a dose-dependent manner up to 94 +/- 8% (mean +/- standard error of the mean) of the basilar arteries of the sham group compared with the empty polymer group (p = 0.006). Results in the empty polymer group were not different from those in the SAH-only group, with a lumen patency of 65 +/- 12%. Lumen patencies of the cromakalim-only groups did not differ in statistical significance at low (64 +/- 9%) or high (66 +/- 7%) doses compared to the SAH-only group. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of SAH with a controlled-release cromakalim/hyaluronan implant prevented experimental cerebral vasospasm in this rat double hemorrhage model; this inhibition was dose-dependent. The authors' results confirm that sustained delivery of cromakalim perivascularly to cerebral vessels could be an effective therapeutic strategy in the treatment of cerebral vasospasm after SAH.