The pathological mechanism of cerebral vasospasm following subarachnoid hemorrhage has not been well clarified until now. There have been reports that denervation supersensitivity in cerebral vessels occurring after subarachnoid hemorrhage may possible play a role in the appearance of cerebral vasospasm. On the other hand, we have accepted that oxyhemoglobin (Oxy-Hb) is an important spasmogenic substance. In the present study, we investigated the effect of chemical denervation (reserpine or 6-hydroxydopamine: 6-OHDA) and surgical denervation (bilateral superior cervical ganglionectomy: SCG) on the constrictive sensitivity of cat basilar arteries to noradrenaline (Nor) and oxyhemoglobin (Oxy-Hb) in situ. METHOD: Adult cats were anesthetized with intramuscular pentobarbital and maintained on a respirator through a tracheostomy. By the transclival approach, the basilar artery was exposed. A cannula was then inserted into the subarachnoid space, and through it, Oxy-Hb and Nor were injected. The sequential changes in caliber of the basilar artery were measured using photography. SCG was done 7 days before the application of Nor or Oxy-Hb and 14 days before application of Oxy-Hb. Pretreatment with reserpine was done as follows: 1 mg/kg of reserpine was injected subcutaneously once each day for 2 days. On the following day, the sensitivity of the basilar arteries to Nor or Oxy-Hb was assessed. Pretreatment with 6-OHDA was done as follows: 5 mg of 6-OHDA was dissolved in 1.0 ml of artificial CSF, and then injected into the cisterna magna. Seven days later, Nor or Oxy-Hb was applied. RESULTS: Pretreatment with reserpine tended to increase the vasoconstriction induced by 10(-7)-10(-4) M of Nor and the constriction induced by 10(-3) M of Nor was increased statistically (P less than 0.05). Cisterna magna injection of 6-OHDA tended to increase the vasoconstriction induced by Nor. SGG tended to increase the vasoconstriction induced by 10(-7)-10(-4) M of Nor and at a dose of 10(-3) M of Nor, the constriction of the basilar arteries was increased statistically (P less than 0.05). However, pretreatment with reserpine, 6-OHDA and SCG did not increase the vasoconstriction induced by Oxy-Hb. These results lead us to suggest that denervation supersensitivity does not participate in the vasoconstriction induced by Oxy-Hb.