The effect of complete clot removal at times from 48 to 96 hours after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) on the development of chronic cerebral vasospasm was evaluated to determine whether there is a critical point after which clot removal is ineffective in preventing vasospasm. Thirty cynomolgus monkeys were randomized to one of five groups: sham-operated group, clot removal at 48 hours after SAH (48-hour group), clot removal at 72 hours after SAH (72-hour group), clot removal at 96 hours after SAH (96-hour group), and clot placement only (clot group). Standard microsurgical techniques were used to dissect bilaterally the major cerebral arteries free of arachnoid. An autologous blood clot averaging 4.2 gm was placed around the vessels in the subarachnoid space of the monkeys in the 48-hour, 72-hour, 96-hour, and clot groups. Physiological saline was instilled into the subarachnoid space of the sham-operated animals. Animals in the clot-removal groups underwent surgical clot removal at the determined times for each group. Two animals in each of the sham-operated and clot groups were subjected to reoperation at each of 48, 72, and 96 hours after SAH. The incisions were reopened and then simply reclosed. Neurological status, angiographic cerebral vessel caliber, and physiological status were evaluated before and 7 days after SAH induction. There were no significant neurological deficits in the sham-operated, 48-hour, or 72-hour groups. Two animals in each of the 96-hour and clot groups showed deterioration in level of consciousness developing on Day 4 or 5 after SAH induction. All the major cerebral arteries of the animals in the clot and 96-hour groups showed significant vasospasm (p less than 0.01) on Day 7. Animals in the 72-hour group had significant vasospasm (p less than 0.05) of the internal carotid and middle cerebral arteries but not the anterior cerebral arteries. There was no significant vasospasm (p greater than 0.05) in any of the cerebral arteries in the 48-hour group. Severity of vasospasm paralleled the duration of contact between the blood clot and the cerebral vessels. Evacuation of the subarachnoid hematoma later than 48 hours after SAH resulted in no significant reduction in the degree of chronic cerebral vasospasm. It is suggested that clot removal at early operation is likely to be useful only if it is performed within 48 hours of SAH.