The efficacy of complete clot removal 24 hours after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in the prevention of chronic cerebral vasospasm was evaluated in monkeys in a blind randomized controlled trial. Twenty-four monkeys were randomized to one of three groups to undergo sham-operation (sham-operated group), clot placement only (clot group), or clot placement and removal (clot-removal group). By means of standard microsurgical techniques, the major cerebral vessels bilaterally were dissected free of arachnoid. An autologous hematoma averaging 5 gm was placed around the vessels in the subarachnoid spaces in the clot and clot-removal groups. Saline solution was instilled in the subarachnoid spaces of the sham-operated group. All animals underwent reoperation 24 hours after the first procedure. In the clot-removal group, the hematoma was evacuated. In the sham-operated and clot groups, the incision was simply closed again after 3 hours of anesthesia. Indices monitored before and 7 days after SAH induction included neurological status, angiographic cerebral vessel caliber, and arterial blood pressure. All animals were evaluated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); representative animals were evaluated with computerized tomography (CT) brain scans. There were no neurological deficits in either the sham-operated or the clot-removal groups. One animal in the clot group developed a progressive delayed ischemic deficit on Day 5 after SAH. A second animal in this group died suddenly on Day 4 post-SAH. An autopsy revealed a recent infarct in the territory of the superior cerebellar artery. Clinical findings correlated with MRI and CT images. Significant vasospasm (25% to 100% reduction in vessel caliber) was present on Day 7 in 100% of the clot animals (p less than 0.01). There was no significant vasospasm (p greater than 0.05) on Day 7 in either the sham-operated or the clot-removal groups. A large volume of clot placed bilaterally resulted in a 25% incidence of delayed ischemic deficit. Evacuation of subarachnoid hematoma within 24 hours of SAH prevented the development of chronic vasospasm and delayed ischemic deficit in the primate model.