The stainless steel cannula method was applied to isolated and perfused canine basilar arteries to examine the role of endothelium in the responses to intraluminal vasoactive substances. After intraluminal treatment with saponin to remove the endothelium, the monophasic constrictions to potassium chloride and prostaglandin F2 alpha were potentiated, while those to phenylephrine (alpha 1-adrenoceptor agonist) and 5-hydroxytryptamine were not changed. Xylazine (alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist) and acetylcholine induced a constriction preceded by a small dilation in controls. The response to xylazine was not modified, while the constriction to acetylcholine was augmented after endothelium removal. Bradykinin, substance P and vasopressin caused a dilation in lower doses, and a dilation followed by a secondary constriction in higher doses in controls. The dilations to these peptides were reduced and the constrictions were enhanced after endothelial removal. Adenosine triphosphate produced a biphasic response, i.e., a dilation followed by a constriction, which was occasionally preceded by a small constriction in higher doses, and only the dilation in lower doses was attenuated. The monophasic dilation to adenosine was potentiated, while the papaverine-induced dilation was not influenced by endothelial removal. After extraluminal treatment with oxyhemoglobin, the dilations to calcium ionophore A23187 and thimerosal were attenuated, while the constriction to acetylcholine was enhanced. The dilations to substance P and vasopressin were depressed, and the constrictions were potentiated. The monophasic dilation to sodium nitroprusside was augmented, while that to papaverine was not changed. These results suggest that the endothelium may play important roles not only in producing endothelium-derived relaxing factors but also in modulating the calcium influx into the smooth muscle cells. The mechanisms of altered responsiveness might be implicated in cerebral vasospasm following subarachnoid hemorrhage.