OBJECTIVE: Nitric oxide (NO) and endothelin-1 (ET-1) are two endothelium-derived factors probably involved in the pathogenesis of cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Our aim was twofold, i.e., to ascertain whether endothelial and nonendothelial NO modulates the contractile response of cerebral arteries to ET-1 and to analyze whether this relationship might be impaired after experimental SAH. METHODS: Rings of middle cerebral artery from goats in the control group and from goats with SAH were set up for isometric tension recordings. SAH was induced 3 days before the experiments by infusion of 10 ml of autologous arterial blood through a catheter previously inserted into the subarachnoid space (basal cistern). In goats in the control group, the response to ET-1 was obtained as follows: 1) in control arteries (unrubbed and nonincubated arteries); 2) in rubbed arteries (arteries in which the endothelium was mechanically removed); 3) during incubation with NG-nitro-L-arginine (L-NOArg) alone or plus L- or D-arginine; and 4) in rubbed arteries plus incubation with L-NOArg. In goats with SAH, that response was obtained in control arteries, rubbed arteries, and during incubation with L-NOArg. Specimens of middle cerebral artery were processed for transmission electron microscopy study. RESULTS: In goats in the control group, ET-1 elicited concentration-dependent contraction of the middle cerebral artery that was significantly potentiated after endothelium denudation or during incubation with L-NOArg. The latter effect was reversed by L-arginine but not by D-arginine. Combined endothelium denudation and incubation with L-NOArg produced a contractile response to ET-1 significantly higher than that induced by each treatment separately. Hyperreactivity to ET-1 was observed in goats with SAH. Endothelium denudation did not alter the enhanced response to ET-1, but it was further significantly increased after incubation with L-NOArg. CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that an ET-1-NO interaction exists in control cerebral arteries in such a way that endothelial and nonendothelial NO partially counteract the contractile response to ET-1 and that although SAH did not modify the effect of nonendothelial NO, the absence of endothelial NO after SAH may contribute to the hyperreactivity of cerebral arteries to ET-1 and, thereby, to the development of cerebral vasospasm.