BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The number of elderly people is markedly increasing in Japan. We have investigated the epidemiology and management outcome of cerebral aneurysms in elderly patients aged > or = 70 years. METHODS: A total of 3100 patients were enrolled in the Yamaguchi Data Bank of Cerebral Aneurysm between 1985 and 1995. Of these, 598 with ruptured cerebral aneurysms and 120 with unruptured cerebral aneurysms were elderly (ie, aged > or = 70 years). RESULTS: The number of elderly patients with cerebral aneurysms has markedly increased since 1991, and in 1995 approximately 30% of all patients with cerebral aneurysms were elderly. In cases of ruptured cerebral aneurysms, the proportion of patients with severe neurological grade did not change and that with an unfavourable outcome did not decrease throughout the 11 years. The proportion of patients with severe neurological grade in the elderly group was higher than in the younger group (< 70 years), and the management outcome of elderly patients for each neurological grade on admission was worse than that of younger patients (P < .01). However, the incidence rate of symptomatic cerebral vasospasm and rebleeding was the same for the two age groups. Eventually, 60.4% of all elderly patients with ruptured cerebral aneurysms had an unfavorable outcome. In cases of unruptured cerebral aneurysms, 63.3% of the selected elderly patients were surgically treated, and the surgical morbidity and mortality rates were 26.3% and 4.0%, respectively. These rates were nonsignificantly higher than those for younger patients. CONCLUSIONS: The number of elderly patients with cerebral aneurysms has markedly increased in Yamaguchi. Because of the unsatisfactory management outcome of ruptured cerebral aneurysms and surgical outcome of unruptured cerebral aneurysms in elderly patients during the 11-year period, we propose the treatment of unruptured cerebral aneurysms at a younger age and the use of a screening system to detect these subjects.