BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Correlation of MRI findings with atherosclerotic vascular lesions has rarely been attempted in patients with cerebellar infarction. The aim of this study was to correlate the MRI lesions with the vascular lesions seen on conventional cerebral angiography in cerebellar infarction. METHODS: The subjects included 31 patients with cerebellar infarcts who underwent both MRI and conventional cerebral angiography. We analyzed the risk factors, clinical findings, imaging study, and angiography results. We attempted to correlate MRI lesions with the vascular lesions shown in the angiograms. RESULTS: The vascular lesions seen on angiograms were subdivided into 3 groups: large-artery disease (n=22), in situ branch artery disease (n=6), and no angiographic disease with hypertension (n=3). The proximal segment (V1) lesions of vertebral artery were the most common angiographic features in patients with large-artery disease in which stroke most commonly involved the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) cerebellum. The V1 lesions with coexistent occlusive lesions of the intracranial vertebral and basilar arteries were correlated with cerebellar infarcts, which had no predilection for certain cerebellar territory. The intracranial occlusive disease without V1 lesion was usually correlated with small cerebellar lesions in PICA and superior cerebellar artery (SCA) cerebellum. The subclavian artery or brachiocephalic trunk lesion was associated with small cerebellar infarcts. The in situ branch artery disease was correlated with the PICA cerebellum lesions, which were territorial or nonterritorial infarct. No angiographic disease with hypertension was associated with small-sized cerebellar infarcts within the SCA, anterior inferior cerebellar artery, or SCA cerebellum. CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that the topographic heterogeneity of cerebellar infarcts are correlated with diverse angiographic findings. The result that large-artery disease, in which nonterritorial infarcts are more common than territorial infarcts, is more prevalent than in situ branch artery disease or small-artery disease, suggest that even a small cerebellar infarct can be a clue to the presence of large-artery disease.