BACKGROUND: Different patterns of risk factors might be related to the involvement of specific vascular districts by atherosclerosis. In this sense, many investigations have addressed coronary artery disease, whereas extracoronary atherosclerosis has received less extensive attention. METHODS AND RESULTS: Vascular risk factors, with particular attention to lipid parameters (total cholesterol [TC]; triglycerides; high density lipoprotein cholesterol [HDL-C], HDL2 and HDL3 cholesterol [HDL2-C, HDL3-C]), were evaluated by means of univariate and multivariate (discriminant) analysis in a group of 169 patients (128 men and 41 women; mean ages, 58 +/- 7 and 62 +/- 7 years, respectively) with clinically and angiographically demonstrated atherosclerosis of the supra-aortic trunk and/or lower limbs. Patients with coronary artery disease were excluded from this study. The control group consisted of 140 age- and sex-matched individuals. By univariate analysis, smoking was more closely associated with peripheral atherosclerosis, whereas blood pressure was higher in patients with supra-aortic disease. Unrecognized diabetes mellitus was a frequent finding in patients with peripheral disease. The percentage of hyperlipidemias was fourfold higher in patients than in control subjects, with differences consisting of higher triglycerides and lower HDL-C, HDL2-C, and HDL3-C concentrations. By discriminant analysis, high correct classification (CC) rates were achieved in the various patient subgroups on the basis of variables selected from the statistical function. In male patients with peripheral disease, the variables HDL-C, smoking, diastolic blood pressure, uric acid, and glucose, in that order, yielded a CC in 90.4% of the cases; in female patients, smoking, TC/HDL-C, and body mass index gave a CC rate of 95.9%. In men with cerebral disease, the selected variables TC/HDL-C, diastolic blood pressure, and TC yielded a CC of 90.7%; in women, uric acid, TC/HDL-C, and fibrinogen levels produced a CC rate of 89.2%. CONCLUSIONS: Risk profiles in atherosclerosis of the supra-aortic trunks and lower limbs seem to differ in relation to gender and circulatory district involved. The importance of lipid parameters, in particular HDL-C, HDL2-C, and TC/HDL-C, as extracoronary risk factors is further confirmed.