 PURPOSE: Procedural safety and high rates of in-stent recurrent stenotic lesions (ISR) remain a concern in the endovascular treatment of intracranial atherosclerotic disease (ICAD). In the present study technical feasibility, safety and efficacy of the paclitaxel eluting balloon-expandable coronary stent Coroflex(®) Please was assessed in the treatment of ICAD. METHODS: A total of 95 patients (79 male; median age 68 years) with 106 intracranial atherosclerotic stenotic lesions underwent endovascular treatment using Coroflex(®) Please stents (B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany). Location and degree of target stenoses before and after treatment and at follow-up and adverse clinical sequelae of treatment were registered. Post-procedural medication included 100 mg acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and 75 mg clopidogrel for 1 year. Angiographic follow-up was scheduled for 6, 12, 26 and 52 weeks after the treatment. RESULTS: The lesion locations were as follows: internal carotid artery (ICA) petrous (n = 44, 42%), ICA cavernous (n = 43, 41%), ICA paraclinoid (n = 4, 4%), intradural vertebral artery (VA; n = 11, 10%) and basilar artery (BA; n = 4, 4%). Of the lesions seven could not be treated due to difficult anatomy and stent stiffness (7% technical failure rate). The combined post-interventional neurological morbidity and mortality rate, including stroke, intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and carotid cavernous fistula (CCF) was n = 4 (3.7%) within and n = 1 (0.9%) at and beyond 30 days, respectively. Angiographic and clinical follow-up examinations were carried out for 78 (78%) of the lesions (mean 16.1 months, maximum 48 months). Asymptomatic recurrent stenosis was seen in 3 out of 78 (3.8%) lesions and there was 1 case of late stent thrombosis (0.9%). CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of ICAD using drug-eluting coronary stents is safe and effective but technical failure due to stent stiffness remains a problem. Application of the more flexible, newest generation thin-strut stents, however, shows promising results.