During the past 33 months we have investigated 6,587 patients using directional continuous-wave Doppler sonography of the carotid arteries. On the basis of 1,671 retrograde brachial and direct carotid angiograms we have developed criteria for demonstrating a significant increase in the peripheral resistance of the internal carotid artery. We distinguished stenoses proximal (15 cases) and distal (4) to the origin of the ophthalmic artery, supraclinoid internal carotid artery occlusions (8), stenoses (2) and obliterations (10) of the middle cerebral artery that developed suddenly. Stenoses in the carotid siphon (proximal or distal to the origin of the ophthalmic artery) showed a reduction of more than 40% in the relative end-diastolic flow velocity (modified Pourcelot's index); in addition, stenoses proximal to the origin of the ophthalmic artery exhibited an alternating flow, or flow reversal, in the supratrochlear artery to a variable extent. Stenoses distal to the origin of the ophthalmic artery only rarely revealed the increase in orthograde flow velocity that had been theoretically expected in the supratrochlear artery. Stenoses of the middle cerebral artery exceeding the extent of atherosclerotic irregularities proved to be an exception. Supraclinoid obliterations of the internal carotid artery were reliably demonstrated by Doppler sonography. However, the reliably demonstrated by Doppler sonography. However, the majority of the occlusions of the middle cerebral artery that developed suddenly could not be detected by this means, probably due to anastomoses between the anterior and middle cerebral arteries, which were detected by means of angiography. Thus, we believe that continuous-wave Doppler sonography is a reliable tool for detecting stenoses of the carotid siphon of more than 60% reduction in lumen diameter as well as supraclinoid carotid artery occlusions. Resistance to the cerebral blood flow that is located more peripherally cannot be diagnosed reliably by this method.