Case 1. A 65 year old male had left hemiparesis with sudden onset since 8 years ago, which gradually aggravated for these 2 years. On Sept. 27, 1973, he was admitted to the Department of Neurosurgery, Kitano Hospital. There was left spastic hemiparesis with hemisensory disturbance and he could not walk without help for the maked spasticity. Left carotid angiogram revealed the complete occlusion of the internal carotid artery and marked stenosis of the external carotid artery at the common carotid bifurcation. External carotid endarterectomy was performed on Nov. 19, 1973, which was followed by STA-MCA anastomosis 2 months later. The spasticity of extremities and left hemisparesis were gradually improved and he was able to walk without help. Case 2. On Apr. 14, 1974, a 63 year old female developed complete stroke with right hemiparesis and speech disturbance after transient ischemic attacks of 5 days duration. On Aug. 9, he was admitted and had emotional incontinence, right hemiparesis, Gerstmann's syndrome and motor aphasia. Left carotid angiogram revealed a saccular aneurysm of the middle cerebral artery and the occlusion of the distal middle cerebral arterys. These findings suggested that the occlusion was caused by embolus from the middle cerebral aneurysm, and the combined surgery with STA-MCA anastomosis and operation for the aneurysm was planned. On Aug. 30, 1974, under left frontotemporal craniotomy, aneurysmal neck clipping and aneurysmectomy were performed and thereafter, STA-MCA double anastomosis was done. One week after operation, the gradual improvement of pre-operative symptomes was noted. Recently, STA-MCA anatomosis is well known to be one of the effective operative methods for the occlusive methods for the occlusive cerebrovascular diseases and in addition, we found that the combination of STA-MCA anastomosis with other operations was effective for unusual cases presenting in this report. Furthermore, except for the occlusive cerebrovascular diseases, we usually plan STA-MCA anastomosis for the cases of 1) carotid ligation or trapping for carotid-cavernous sinus fistula and some internal carotid aneurysms, 2) some intracranial tumors with the danger involving the main cerebral arteries by operation to protect the cerebrovascular insufficiency.