From 1977 to 1984, 752 reconstructions of the supra-aortic arteries were performed at our service. In a group of 31 patients presenting with transient ischemic attacks (13) or minor strokes (15), preoperative multiplane angiograms identified lesions from various causes in extremely high locations (fibromuscular dysplasia, 10; atherosclerosis, 6; traumatic changes, 10; spontaneous dissection, 3; and mycotic aneurysms and others, 4) in 34 internal carotid arteries (aneurysms, 10; and stenosis, 24). Surgery was performed on 30 patients. Flow restoration was achieved by resection and vein graft replacement (20), gradual dilatation (5), thromboendarterectomy (6), and tangential clip for exclusion of a lateral aneurysm (1). Only one patient was treated with an extracranial-intracranial anastomosis because the stenosis extended into the carotid siphon. One patient was treated with heparin. Exposure of the internal carotid artery (ICA) at the base of the skull required dissection of the digastric muscle, careful mobilization of the cranial nerves, and detachment of the styloid process in 29 patients. Partial resection of the mastoid process was helpful in two patients. The carotid bone canal was opened from the lateral side in four cases to allow the most distal anastomosis 1 cm within the carotid canal. Back-bleeding was controlled by a balloon catheter. A shunt was impossible to use and clamping time averaged 62 +/- 40 minutes. Except for one recurrent stroke and two transient ischemic attacks no other neurologic deficits occurred. Cranial nerve damage could not be avoided in 21 cases (nervus recurrens, 7; nervus glossopharyngeus, 16; and nervus facialis, 4) but disappeared clinically within a 1- to 6-month period in all but two. Each surgical patient underwent control angiography, which demonstrated 30 arteries to be patent, two became occluded, and one had an insignificant stenosis. We conclude that standard surgical techniques are unsuitable for repair of highly located lesions of the ICA. Although extracranial-intracranial anastomosis has been proposed in patients with planned ligation of the ICA, the anatomic reconstruction remains advantageous because flow is restored to normal and the source of emboli is eliminated. With the use of a special approach, graft replacement can be performed up to the base of the skull.