Epigenetic mechanisms play a key role in regulating gene expression. One hallmark of these modifications is DNA methylation at cytosine residues of CpG dinucleotides in gene promoters, transposons and imprinting control regions. Genomic imprinting refers to an epigenetic marking of genes that results in monoallelic expression depending on their parental origin. There are two critical time periods in epigenetic reprogramming: gametogenesis and early preimplantation development. Major reprogramming takes place in primordial germ cells in which parental imprints are erased and totipotency is restored [1]. Imprint marks are then and re-established during spermatogenesis or oogenesis, depending on sex [1-3]. Upon fertilization, genome-wide demethylation occurs followed by a wave of de novo methylation, both of which are resisted by imprinted loci [4]. Epigenetic patterns are usually faithfully maintained during development. However, this maintenance sometimes fails, resulting in the disturbance of epigenetic patterns and human disorders. For example, two fetal growth disorders, the Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS) and the Silver-Russell (SRS) syndromes with opposite phenotypes, are caused by abnormal DNA methylation at the 11p15 imprinted locus [5-7]: respectively loss of methylation at the Imprinting Region Center (ICR2) or gain of methylation at ICR1 in BWS and loss of methylation at ICR1 in SRS. Early embryogenesis is a critical time for epigenetic regulation, and this process is sensitive to environmental factors. The use of assisted reproductive technology (ART) has been shown to induce epigenetic alterations and to affect fetal growth and development [8-11]. In humans, several imprinting disorders, including BWS, occur at significantly higher frequencies in children conceived with the use of ART than in children conceived spontaneously [12,13]. The cause of these epigenetic imprinting disorders (following ART, unfertility causes, hormonal hyperstimulation, in vitro fertilization-IVF, Intracytoplasmic sperm injection-ICSI, micro-manipulation of gametes, exposure to culture medium, in vitro ovocyte maturation, time of transfer) remains unclear. However, recent data have shown that in patients with BWS or SRS, including those born following the use of ART, the DNA methylation defect involves imprinted loci other than 11p15 [14,15] (11p15 region: CTCF binding sites at ICR1, H19 and IGF2 DMRs, KCNQ1OT1 [ICR2], SNRPN [chromosome 15 q11-13], PEG/MEST1 [chromosome 7q31], IGF type2 receptor and ZAC1 [chromosome 6q26 et 6q24 respectively], DLK1/GTL2-IG-DMR [chromosome 14q32] and GNAS locus [chromosome 20q13.3]). This suggests that unfaithful maintenance of DNA methylation marks following fertilization involves the dysregulation of a trans-acting regulatory factor that could be altered by ART.