Hepatic bilirubin uridine diphosphate glucuronyl-transferase (UDP-glucuronyltransferase) catalyzes the formation of bilirubin monoglucuronides (BMG, C-8 and C-12 isomers) and bilirubin diglucuronide (BDG) from bilirubin and the cosubstrate, UDP-glucuronic acid. Distinctive patterns of bile pigment excretion occur in different species and in pathologic disorders (e.g., Gilbert's syndrome). In normal human and monkey (Macaca fascicularis) bile, the proportion of BDG exceeds that of BMG and the C-8/C-12 BMG isomer ratio approaches unity. To investigate the mechanisms responsible for the patterns of BDG and BMG isomers in bile, we used a radiochemical assay to analyze the kinetics and regulation of bilirubin UDP-glucuronyltransferase in microsomes prepared from monkey liver. The synthesis of BMG from bilirubin was a higher capacity, lower affinity step (Vmax = 295 pmol/mg protein X min, Km = 24 microM) than BDG synthesis from endogenously formed BMG (Vmax = 170 pmol/mg protein X min, Km = 14 microM). This observation was confirmed when biosynthetically prepared BMG was used as substrate. The rate of formation of BDG relative to BMG was modulated by both bilirubin and UDP-glucuronic acid concentration, whereas the C-8/C-12 BMG isomer ratio was influenced exclusively by UDP-glucuronic acid concentration. The data obtained with increasing UDP-glucuronic acid concentration did not obey conventional single-site kinetics, suggesting the presence of more than one binding site on the enzyme or a membrane transporter for this nucleotide sugar. These findings demonstrate that microsomal bilirubin UDP-glucuronyltransferase has a greater capacity for BMG than BDG synthesis, and thus support the concept that the decreased BDG/BMG ratio in the bile of patients with reduced hepatic enzyme activity (i.e., Gilbert's syndrome and type II Crigler-Najjar disease) reflects the diminished capacity of the enzyme to synthesize BDG from BMG. Bilirubin and UDP-glucuronic acid concentrations both appear to be pivotal in regulating the synthesis of individual bilirubin glucuronides and hence the patterns of bilirubin conjugates excreted in bile.