We report a 21-year-old man with distal dominant progressive muscle atrophy. The patient was apparently well until 17 years of age when he noted a decrease in exercise tolerance. One year later, he noted difficulty in arising his heels when the walked. He was admitted to our service for the work up in June 10, 1992. On admission, the patient was rather slender in the body build up; otherwise general physical examination was unremarkable. Upon neurologic examination, mental status and higher cerebral functions were normal. In the cranial nerves, the sternocleidomastoid muscles were atrophic bilaterally; other cranial nerves appeared intact. His gait was unstable and he showed steppage gait; walking on toes and heels were impossible. Distal dominant muscle atrophy was noted in both upper and lower extremities. Muscle strength in the deltoid, biceps brachii and triceps brachii was normal. In the lower extremities, both tibialis anterior and triceps surae muscles were weak (3/5). The iliopsoas and quadriceps femoris muscles were normal, however, the adductor muscles of the thigh showed marked weakness (2/5). Myotonia was absent. Deep reflexes were decreased; sensation was intact. Routine blood tests were unremarkable; CK was 96 IU/l, lactate 6.9 mg/dl, and pyruvate 0.61 mg/dl. After an ischemic forearm exercise test, blood lactate level rose to 22.5mg/dl (base line 11.2), and blood ammonia to 88.3 micrograms/dl (base line 71.2). EMG showed myogenic changes and myotonic discharges. A diagnostic biopsy was performed. The patient was discussed in a neurologic CPC, and the chief discussant arrived at the conclusion that the patient had type III glycogen storage disease. The differential diagnosis included rimmed vacuole type myopathy, Miyoshi type distal muscular dystrophy, Welander type muscular dystrophy, adult type acid-maltase deficiency, and lysosomal glycogen storage disease with normal acid maltase. However, characteristic clinical presentation of initial weakness in the triceps surae muscle associated with atrophy of the sternocleidomastoid muscle confirmed best of the clinical characteristics of type III glycogen storage disease; the only finding which did not fit with its diagnosis was elevation of the blood lactate level after the ischemic exercise test. The muscle biopsy specimen showed marked vacuole formation; approximately 20 to 30% of the vacuoles were rimmed vacuoles, however, the majority was not rimmed. PAS staining on an epon-embedded specimen revealed marked accumulation of PAS-positive materials in those vacuoles as well as in the interfascular space. The non-rimmed vacuoles were not positively stained in the acid-phosphatase staining, which exclude the diagnosis of acid maltase deficiency. No mitochondrial abnormalities were found.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)