The temporospatial expression pattern of the nuclear DNA repair enzyme redox factor-1 (ref-1), the p53-activated gene (pag) 608 and the effector caspase-3 was examined by in situ hybridization histochemistry in gerbils subjected to two 10-min episodes of unilateral common carotid artery occlusion, separated by 5h. Gene responses were correlated with the metabolic state, as revealed by regional adenosine 5'-triphosphate bioluminescent imaging, and with the degree of histological damage, as assessed by haematoxylin-eosin staining and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated-dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL), in order to evaluate the role of these genes in the maturation of injury. Focal infarcts developed in the dorsolateral cerebral cortex at the bregma level and the nucleus caudate-putamen within four days after repeated unilateral ischemia, as indicated by a secondary adenosine 5'-triphosphate loss after initial adenosine 5'-triphosphate recovery and by histomorphological signs of pannecrosis. The more caudal cortex at hippocampal levels and the hippocampus (CA1>CA3 area), however, exhibited selective neuronal injury without adenosine 5'-triphosphate depletion. TUNEL+ cells appeared starting 5h after repeated unilateral ischemia. TUNEL+ cells reached maximum levels in the caudate-putamen at 12-24h, but much later in the cortex and hippocampus at two days after ischemia. Remarkably few TUNEL+ cells were noticed in the thalamus, where adenosine 5'-triphosphate state did not recover after reperfusion. Following repeated unilateral ischemia, a transient elevation of ref-1 mRNA was detected after 5h in the cerebral cortex and hippocampal CA1 area. Ref-1 mRNA levels decreased within 12-24h, before the onset of tissue damage. Subsequently, pag608 and caspase-3 mRNA levels increased, closely in parallel with the appearance of DNA fragmented cells, but slightly prior to the deterioration of adenosine 5'-triphosphate state. In the caudate-putamen, pag608 and caspase-3 mRNAs reached maximum levels already 12-24h after repeated common carotid artery occlusion, when DNA fragmentation was most prominent, and declined thereafter. In the cortex and hippocampal CA1-3 areas, where DNA damage appeared more slowly, pag608 and caspase-3 mRNAs were induced starting 24h after ischemia, and remained elevated even after two to four days. The levels of pag608 and caspase-3 mRNAs were similar at rostral and caudal levels of the cortex, as well as in the hippocampal CA1 and CA3 area, although the degree of injury differed considerably between these structures. Notably, pag608 and caspase-3 mRNAs were not elevated in the thalamus after repeated unilateral ischemia. The present report shows a close temporal association between the induction of ref-1, pag608 and caspase-3 mRNAs, the manifestation of cell injury and the secondary adenosine 5'-triphosphate depletion in infarcting brain areas, suggesting (i) that de novo responses of these genes may be involved in the maturation of cell injury and (ii) that apoptotic programs and the secondary deterioration of cerebral energy state may interfere with each other after ischemia.