BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: We sought to investigate whether in patients with a symptomatic internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion, endarterectomy of a severe stenosis of the contralateral carotid artery can establish long-term cerebral hemodynamic improvement. METHODS: Nineteen patients were studied on average 1 month before and 6 months after contralateral carotid endarterectomy (CEA). Volume flow in the main extracranial and intracranial arteries was measured with MR angiography. Collateral flow via the circle of Willis and the ophthalmic arteries was studied with MR angiography and transcranial Doppler sonography, respectively. Cerebral metabolism and CO(2) vasoreactivity were investigated with MR spectroscopy and transcranial Doppler sonography, respectively. Twelve nonoperated patients with a symptomatic ICA occlusion and contralateral ICA stenosis, who were matched for age and sex, served as control patients. RESULTS: In patients who underwent surgery, flow in the operated ICA increased significantly (P:<0.05) and flow in the basilar artery decreased significantly (P:<0.01) after CEA. On the occlusion side, mean flow in the middle cerebral artery increased significantly from 71 to 85 mL/min (P:<0.05) after CEA. The prevalence of collateral flow via the anterior communicating artery to the occlusion side increased significantly (47% before and 84% after CEA; P:<0.05), while the prevalence of reversed ophthalmic artery flow on the operation side decreased significantly (42% before and 5% after CEA; P:<0.05). In the hemisphere on the side of the ICA occlusion, lactate was no longer detected after CEA in 80% of operated patients, whereas it was no longer detected over time in 14% of nonoperated patients (P:<0.05). CO(2) reactivity increased significantly in operated patients in both hemispheres (P:<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Contralateral CEA in patients with a symptomatic ICA occlusion induces cerebral hemodynamic improvement not only on the side of surgery but also on the side of the ICA occlusion.