BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Evidence suggests that an alteration in cerebral hemodynamics plays a relevant role in the occurrence of stroke in patients with carotid occlusion. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the relationships among baseline characteristics, type and number of collateral pathways, cerebral vasomotor reactivity (VMR), and outcome of patients with carotid occlusion. METHODS: One hundred four patients with symptomatic or asymptomatic internal carotid artery occlusion were followed up prospectively for a median period of 24 months. Cerebral VMR to apnea was calculated with transcranial Doppler ultrasonography by means of the breath-holding index (BHI) in the middle cerebral arteries. The patency of the 3 major intracranial collateral vessels was also evaluated. RESULTS: During the follow-up period, 18 patients experienced an ischemic stroke ipsilateral to internal carotid artery occlusion. Among factors considered, only older age, number of collateral pathways, and BHI values in the middle cerebral artery ipsilateral to the occluded side were significantly associated with the risk of ipsilateral stroke (P<0.001, P=0.008, and P<0.001, respectively; multiple Cox regression analysis). A normal VMR and favorable prognosis characterized patients with full collateral development; in this group, no patient experienced an ischemic event. On the other hand, an impaired VMR and increased probability of experiencing a stroke were found in patients without collateral pathways; the annual risk of ipsilateral stroke in this group was 32.7%. Patients with 1 or 2 collateral pathways showed a different VMR ranging from normal to strongly reduced BHI values. The ipsilateral stroke event risk was 17.5% in patients with 1 collateral vessel and 2.7% in patients with 2 collateral pathways. In this case, the risk of cerebrovascular events occurring during the follow-up period was significantly related to VMR. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that cerebral hemodynamic status in patients with carotid occlusive disease is influenced by both individual anatomic and functional characteristics. The planning of strategies to define the risk profile and any attempt to influence patients' outcome should be based on the evaluation of the intracranial hemodynamic adaptive status, with particular attention to the number of collateral vessels and the related VMR.