OBJECTIVES: To report a 6 year experience with carotid percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (CPTA) in a selected group of patients. MATERIAL AND METHOD: We retrospectively reviewed our experience after performing 54 CPTAs, with (n=18) or without (n=36) stent deployment, over a period of 6 years from 1993 to 1999. All patients, except one, suffered from focal hemispheric neurologic symptoms. During the same time period 284 patients underwent carotid endarterectomy. The selection of the 54 patients (16%) for CPTA was based on the carotid angiogram and the sole inclusion criterion for endovascular treatment was a short, concentric, and smooth stenosis of more than 70% without ulceration or severe calcification. All patients who had a patent internal carotid artery after the last control were invited for a clinical duplex examination and all duplex examinations were carried out by a single experienced observer. RESULTS: Early outcome (<30 days): CPTA was judged technically successful in 50 cases (93%). Ten patients (18%) experienced a neurological event in relation to the procedure and one patient (2%) suffered a major stroke. One stent occluded within 30 days. LATE OUTCOME: Forty-six patients (85%) entered the follow-up study after a median of 34 months (range 1-80 months). Six patients (13%) had recurrent symptoms. The colour-duplex examination (n=45) showed internal carotid artery occlusion in 2 patients (5%), and restenosis (>70%) in 10 patients (22%). We found no significant difference in the reoccurrence of neurological symptoms or the rate of restenosis between patients treated with and without stent (Log Rank 0.28, p=0,59). ICA was patent without restenosis in 60% after 48 months in patients treated with CPTA alone, and in 76% after 3 months in patients treated with a stent (N.S.). CONCLUSION: CPTA in a selected group of patients has a mortality and major stroke rate comparable to that of carotid endarterectomy. However, the risk of transient neurological events was high, as well as the incidence of restenosis (>70%) after 3 years. We still consider CPTA an experimental procedure. The indications for this treatment must be clarified if CPTA should be an alternative to surgery with a comparable neurological complication rate.