 BACKGROUND: Endovascular therapy (ET) of internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis is equivalent to carotid endarterectomy for stroke prevention; however, patients with ICA occlusion and acute symptoms are traditionally not candidates for ET. We report our experience in endovascular recanalization of acute stroke patients with ICA occlusion. PATIENTS AND TECHNIQUES: We reviewed our registry for acute stroke patients treated with ET who had (1) ICA occlusion by digital subtraction angiography (thrombolysis in myocardial ischemia=0) with location of type II (above ophthalmic artery involving M1 or A1 but not both) or type III (proximal to the ophthalmic artery but distal to the bifurcation); (2) acute stroke symptoms from the index lesion presenting 3 hours after onset of symptoms; (3) minimal ischemic changes on brain CT scan (less than one third of the MCA territory); (4) attempted ET. Neuroradiologists reviewed angiograms for thrombolysis in cerebral infarction. A blinded vascular neurologist reviewed post-procedural brain imaging for Alberta Stroke Program Early CT (ASPECT) scoring. Outcome scales were assessed. RESULTS: We identified 14 patients, 10 of whom were men (mean age, 58 +/- 14 years; median age, 54 years; age range, 40-74 years). There were 8 left ICA occlusions, 3 type II; and 6 right ICA occlusions, one type II. Median baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 17 (range, 11-25; mean, 18 +/- 4.9). Mean time to ET was 389 +/- 103 minutes (median, 306 minutes; range, 197-1290 minutes). Immediate recanalization occurred in 64%. Decrease in expected stroke volume by brain imaging occurred in 50% with mean ASPECT score of 4 +/- 2.9 (median, 3; range, 0-8; 21% > or = 8). Two hemorrhages occurred, one symptomatic; 3 patients died. Good outcome was achieved in 64% of cases. CONCLUSION: Endovascular therapy of carotid occlusion in hyperacute stroke patients is feasible and may help to reduce stroke volume and increase good outcome in some patients.