Extracranial-to-intracranial (EC-IC) bypass surgery for the prevention of stroke in patients with symptomatic carotid artery occlusion has nearly ended after a randomized trial showed no benefit of the procedure. Although an EC-IC bypass might benefit patients with compromised cerebrovascular hemodynamics, the randomized trial did not differentiate patients with hemodynamic from embolic etiologies. However, subsequent investigators have identified a subgroup of patients at increased stroke risk from hemodynamic compromise. METHODS: We examined the subsequent stroke rate of 42 patients with symptomatic carotid occlusion at high risk for stroke identified as having a baseline cerebral blood flow (CBF)<45 mL/100 g/min and a >5% CBF reduction in one vascular territory after a vasodilatory challenge from 1 g of intravenous acetazolamide on stable xenon-computed tomography (CT) CBF imaging. RESULTS: Thirty patients (group 1) treated medically were a subgroup with carotid occlusion from our long-term natural history study. During a median follow-up of 12 months, 9 patients (30%) had a new stroke within a median of 5 months. Twelve patients (group 2) had recurrent, disabling cerebral ischemic symptoms, with 8 progressing to mild fixed neurological deficits from deep white matter infarction identified on CT. All were treated with superficial temporal artery to distal middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) bypass with restoration of cerebrovascular reserve postoperatively; none had a stroke during the 18-month minimum follow-up (P=.041). Perioperative morbidity included subendocardial infarction in one and a small, asymptomatic left frontal hemorrhage in another patient. Early postoperative and delayed xenon/CT CBF studies obtained a median of 5 months postoperatively showed maintenance of cerebrovascular reserve. CONCLUSION: STA-MCA bypass surgery can restore cerebrovascular reserve in high-risk patients with symptomatic internal carotid artery occlusion. This was achieved with minimal perioperative complications, resulting in a subsequent reduction of stroke frequency. We suggest that the efficacy of STA-MCA bypass surgery for symptomatic carotid occlusion be re-examined prospectively using hemodynamic selection criteria.