 OBJECTIVES: To evaluate early and late results of carotid endarterectomy (CEA) in female patients in a large single center experience. METHODS: Over a 12-year period ending in December 2007, 4009 consecutive primary and secondary CEAs in 3324 patients were performed at our institution. All patients were prospectively enrolled in a dedicated database containing pre-, intra-, and postoperative parameters. Patients were female in 1200 cases (1020 patients; Group 1) and male in the remaining 2809 (2304 patients, Group 2). Early results in terms of intraoperative neurological events and 30-day stroke and death rates were analyzed and compared. Follow-up results were analyzed with Kaplan Meier curves and compared with log-rank test. RESULTS: Patients of Group 1 were more likely to have hyperlipemia, diabetes, and hypertension; patients of Group 2 were more likely to be smokers and to have concomitant coronary artery disease (CAD) and peripheral arterial disease (PAD). There were no differences in terms of clinical status or degree of stenosis. Patients of Group 2 had a significantly higher percentage of contralateral carotid artery occlusion than patients in Group 1 (6.9% and 3.9%, respectively; P < .001). Thirty-day stroke and death rates were similar in the two groups (1.2% for both groups). Univariate analysis demonstrated the presence of CAD, PAD, diabetes, and contralateral carotid artery occlusion to significantly affect 30-day stroke and death rate in female patients. At multivariate analysis, only diabetes (odds ratio [OR] 3.6, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.1-0.9; P = .05) and contralateral occlusion (OR 7.4, 95% CI 0.03-0.6; P = .006) were independently associated with an increased perioperative risk of stroke and death. Median duration of follow-up was 27 months (range, 1-144 months). There were no overall differences between the two groups in terms of survival, freedom from ipsilateral stroke, freedom from any neurological symptom, and incidence of severe (>70%) restenosis. In contrast to male patients, univariate and multivariate analysis demonstrated that female patients with diabetes or contralateral occlusion had an increased risk of developing ipsilateral neurological events during follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: Female sex per se does not represent an adjunctive risk factor during CEA, with early and long term results comparable to those obtained in male patients. However, in our study we found subgroups of female patients at higher surgical risk, requiring careful intra- and postoperative management.