OBJECTIVE: To compare the features of brain injury in neonatal rats with different severities of hypoxia-ischemia (HI), and explore the role of microglial activation and cytokines. METHODS: One hundred and twenty 7-day-old rats were randomized to three groups: sham control, mild HI, and severe HI. The rats in the HI groups were subjected to right carotid artery occlusion and 8% oxygen hypoxia exposure (40 minutes, 34.5 Celsius degree in the mild HI group; 65 minutes, 35.5 Celsius degree in the severe HI group). MRI, microtubule associated protein (MAP2) and TUNEL staining were used to confirm the severity of brain injury. Changes in expression of activated microglia (ED1) and signs of cytokine involvement or oxidative stress (TNF-alpha, nitrotyrosine) were assessed immunohistochemically. RESULTS: In the mild HI group, MRI scans demonstrated increased T2 values in the ipsilateral subcortical white matter and a slight loss of T2 values in the cortex, corresponding to a medium loss of MAP2 in the ipsilateral cortex. There was an increase in the number of TUNEL positive cells compared to the control group within the subcortical white matter. In the severe HI group, the T2 value increased in the majority of the hemisphere, corresponding to a severe loss of staining for MAP2 in the ispilateral hemisphere. The number of TUNEL positive cells significantly increased in the ipsilateral cortex and white matter. In the mild HI group, ED1, TNF-alpha and nitrotyrosine expression increased only in the acute stage and was only observed in subcortical white matter. In contrast, after severe HI, the increase in ED1, TNF-alpha and nitrotyrosine expression was observed in the whole ipsilateral hemisphere and prolonged for weeks. CONCLUSIONS: Following a mild HI a relatively selective white matter injury compares to the pannecrosis in the cortex and white matter following a severe HI. Microglial activation and over-expression of cytokines might contribute to the development of hypoxic-ischemic brain damage.