In pentobarbital (35.0 mg/kg) anaesthetised dogs, bolus injections of prazosin into the femoral artery (3.0--300.0 microgram) provoked a dose-related fall in the vascular resistance of the innervated hind limb. In contrast to papaverine, prazosin failed to produce the same effect in dogs under spinal anaesthesia even when the intrinsic femoral vascular tone was increased with vasopressin. However, vasodilator effects of prazosin were again observed when the tone of the limb was elevated by either stimulating the sympathetic lumbar chain or by infusing alpha-adrenoceptor agonists. A significant reduction of both aortic blood pressure and pressor response to bilateral carotid artery occlusion was noted in a group of normotensive dogs anaesthetised 12 h after the last dose of prazosin given twice daily at 0.5 mg/kg, p.o., for 3 day period. This short-term treatment modified neither the resting heart rate nor the positive chronotropic effect induced by either intravenous noradrenaline or electrical stimulation of pre- and post-ganglionic nerve fibres of the right stellate ganglion. However, it prevented the larger increase in heart rate in response to bilateral carotid occlusion in placebo-treated dogs after section of the vagi. A decrease in baseline sympathetic tone of the perfused hind limb as well as vasoconstrictor effects produced by i.a. injections of several alpha-adrenoceptor agonists and electrical stimulation of the lumbar sympathetic chain was observed in prazosin-treated animals. The dose--pressor response profiles to these alpha-adrenoceptor stimulants after prazosin were not parallel to those obtained in the control group. The vasoconstrictor response to angiotensin II was not changed by prazosin. In rabbit aortic strips, prazosin (0.1--3.0 micrometer) produced competitive antagonism of the contractile responses induced by cirazoline, noradrenaline and phenylephrine. In contrast to papaverine, prazosin in concentrations up to 100.0 micrometer neither relaxed the aortic strips contracted by potassium ions nor modified the concentration-response curve to calcium ions. These studies indicate that blood pressure lowering effects of prazosin given acutely or for three days can be accounted for by a clear-cut functional impairment of vascular postsynaptic alpha-adrenoceptors. No evidence for a direct myorelaxant property of prazosin could be obtained in these studies.