The aim was to study a relationship between the flow pattern in the ophthalmic artery (OA), the siphon and vessels within the circle of Willis. 27 patients, 22 males and 5 females, mean age 63 +/- 15 years (SD) with unilateral occlusion of the internal carotid artery (ICA) were examined by 3-dimensional Transcranial Doppler scanner. Flow signals from the OA, the siphon and intracranial vessels were registered before and after i.v. injection of 1 g acetazolamide. Pathological flow pattern was found in 18 patients in the OA on the occluded side consisting of 12 retrograde and 6 isoelectric flow directions. After acetazolamide injection retrograde systolic velocities (SV) increased significantly (p < 0.01), but anterograde velocities remained unchanged as did 3 isoelectric flow patterns, 2 turned to retrograde and one to anterograde flow direction. In the siphon lower resting anterograde mean velocities (MV) were found on both sides (p < 0.05) compared to normal subjects. Six patients had the same retrograde flow as in the OA. After acetazolamide MV in the siphon increased (p < 0.01) only on the nonoccluded side. Baseline retrograde ophthalmic SV and MV in the siphon correlated (p < 0.01 and p < 0.05 respectively) with MV in the middle cerebral artery (MCA) according to linear regression analysis (r = 0.78 and 0.59 respectively). All patients, having impaired vasomotor reactivity (VMR) < or = 11% in the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) on the occluded side, had pathological flow pattern in the OA. Patients with greatest difference (delta) between MV in the ACA on the nonoccluded and occluded side had a tendency to anterograde flow (r = 0.56, p < 0.05). Pulsative index (PI) in the ACA on the occluded side was lowest in the category with retrograde flow in the OA (0.67 +/- 0.14) and differed (p < 0.05) from normals and from the category with isoelectric and anterograde flow. Correlation of retrograde flow direction in the OA and baseline MV in the MCA and low PI in the ACA on the occluded side indicates a supplying ophthalmic collateral to the anterior brain circulation. Impaired VMR in the ACA on the occluded side in connection with pathological flow pattern in the OA may reflect an exhaustion of the ACA as a supplying vessel.