The gerbils brains after 3- and 4-minute-long ischemia caused by bilateral common carotid artery occlusion and 14 days survival were investigated using lectin techniques. Chosen lectins, represented by synthetic plant glycoproteids, which are specifically bound to particular sugar residues (receptors) located on the cell surfaces were examined. Lectins recognizing the following sugar residues have been used in our experiment: 1. N-acetyl-D-galactosyl (using Helix pomatia agg., HPA) 2. alpha-D-mannosyl and alpha-D-glucosyl (using Concanavalin A, Con A). 3. beta-D-galactosyl (using Ricinus communis agg., RCA-120). 4. beta-D-galactosyl and neuraminic acid (using Arachis hypogaea-Peanut agg., PNA). 5. N-acetyl-galactosaminyl and N-acetyl-neuraminic acid (using Wheat germ agg., WGA). Changes in the glycoconjugates localization were found in neurons, glial cells, vessels, white matter fibers or neuropil. They were expressed by the weaking of the reaction with HPA in the hippocampus and white matter comparing to control. Con A receptors were considerably less susceptible to ischemia, though appearance of positively stained glial cells not found in the control group has been observed. Reaction with RCA-120 localized selectively in the network of capillary vessels decreased considerably. Similarly, receptors marked using PNA revealed reduction of staining reaction in white matter as well as in hippocampal interneurons. Using WGA we have also observed that staining reaction was reduced in capillary as well as in neuropil. That lectin indicated additionally strong accumulation of its sugar residues in glial cells appearing as a result of ischemia in particular sectors of hippocampus. The same cells were also Con A positive. The presented results indicate functionally and histochemically perceptible changes taking place in particular CNS elements as a result of short ischemia, expressed by the disturbances in the localization and accumulation of specific sugar residues examined with the use of lectin technique.