Although neuronal death has been studied in experimental models of ischemia, the precise mechanisms regulating cell death remain unclear. Furthermore, the timing and pattern of neuronal death in human stroke has not been extensively studied. To further our understanding of ischemia-induced neuronal death, we examined the temporal profile of histochemical and morphologic characteristics of hippocampal neuronal death following experimental forebrain ischemia and compared these findings to human brain specimens obtained from subjects suffering cerebral infarction. Transient forebrain ischemia (TFI) was induced in normothermic adult rats by bilateral carotid artery occlusion combined with hypotension. Animals were sacrificed at 6, 12, 18, 24, 48, and 72 h and 7, 14, and 28 days following ischemia (n = 4 at each time point). Experimental tissue was analyzed using light and electron microscopy as well as TUNEL histochemistry. A total of 27 human brain specimens with neuropathological confirmation of ischemic damage and appropriate controls were also examined using light microscopy and TUNEL histochemistry. Dense TUNEL staining in hippocampal CA-1 neurons was present at 48 and 72 h following experimental ischemia. Prior to these times, little or no nuclear staining was noted and after 72 h nuclear staining diminished rapidly. Ultrastructural findings at these time points demonstrated many features similar to those seen in cells undergoing apoptosis, such as cell shrinkage with increased electron density, chromatin condensation with formation of heterochromatin, intact plasma membranes, and intact intracellular organelles. In a similar fashion, human stroke specimens during the subacute period showed dense nuclear TUNEL staining in penumbral neurons, whereas in the acute or chronic stages little or no staining was noted. Our results demonstrate that the timing of morphologic changes and TUNEL histochemistry following human stroke resembles that observed in experimental TFI. Furthermore, neuronal death in both experimental ischemia and human stroke share several features characteristic of apoptotic cell death.