OBJECTIVE: To determine whether humans with type 2 diabetes have increased levels of oxidized fatty acids in their serum chylomicron fraction after the ingestion of dietary oxidized fatty acids. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The study was performed on 31 male type 2 diabetic patients and 24 age-matched control subjects. Among the diabetic patients, 22 had poor glycemic control, defined as HbA1 > 10% (normal value < 7.7%). Nine patients had good glycemic control (HbA1 < or = 10). Heated corn oil containing low or high levels of oxidized fatty acids was used as a test meal. At 2.5 h after the test meal, 50-ml blood samples were obtained from all subjects, and the chylomicron fraction (Sf > 1,000) was isolated. The degree of oxidation in chylomicrons was determined by measuring conjugated dienes. For determining the postprandial levels of triglycerides and of oxidized lipids in serum chylomicrons over an extended time period, blood samples were obtained at 0, 2.5, 5.0, and 7.5 h for isolation of chylomicrons and determination of fatty acid oxidation. RESULTS: We found that at 2.5 h after the consumption of the test meal containing either a low or high oxidized fatty acid content, conjugated dienes in serum chylomicrons in diabetic subjects in poor glycemic control were increased compared with those in control subjects. Diabetic patients in good glycemic control had similar levels of oxidized lipid in their chylomicrons when compared with control subjects. Additionally, in diabetic patients in poor glycemic control, the levels of oxidized lipids in chylomicrons remained elevated for an extended post-prandial period. CONCLUSIONS: In diabetic subjects with poor glycemic control, dietary oxidized lipids induce an exaggerated and sustained increase in the levels of oxidized lipids in chylomicrons when compared with either control subjects or diabetic patients with good glycemic control. These increased postprandial levels of potentially atherogenic oxidized lipids may contribute to the accelerated atherosclerosis associated with diabetes.