OBJECTIVE: Mice lacking the tumor necrosis factor-alpha receptor 2 (TNFR2) gene fed a high-fat diet gain less weight and display reduced leptin and insulin levels. In humans, plasma levels of the soluble fraction of TNFR2 (sTNFR2) circulate in proportion to the degree of insulin resistance. The purpose of this study was to evaluate a polymorphism in the 3' untranslated region of the TNFR2 gene on chromosome 1 in relation to BMI, leptin levels, and insulin resistance. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Using single-strand conformation polymorphism, the polymorphism was analyzed in 107 nondiabetic subjects (60 women, 47 men) and in 110 consecutive patients with type 2 diabetes (79 women, 31 men). In a subset of 33 healthy subjects, insulin sensitivity (minimal model analysis) was also evaluated. RESULTS: Four alleles of the TNFR2 gene were identified (A1, A2, A3, and A4). BMI and serum leptin levels were significantly increased in young carriers of the A2 allele. Plasma sTNFR2 levels were similar among the different TNFR2 gene variants. However, in subjects who did not carry the A2 allele, in young subjects, and in women, plasma sTNFR2 levels were proportional to BMI and leptin levels. In the study sample, carriers of the A2 allele (n = 18) showed significantly increased BMI, fat mass, waist-to-hip ratio, serum total and VLDL triglyceride levels, and leptin levels and had a lower insulin sensitivity index than noncarriers of the A2 variant (n = 15). The frequency of the different alleles among diabetic subjects was similar to that in the control population. However, diet-treated diabetic subjects (n = 49) who were carriers of the A2 allele exhibited significantly higher BMI and leptin levels than diet-treated noncarriers of the A2 allele. CONCLUSIONS: The presence of the A2 allele in the TNFR2 gene may predispose subjects to obesity and higher leptin levels, which may in turn predispose them to insulin resistance or vice versa. The TNFR2 gene may be involved in weight-control mechanisms.