OBJECTIVE: To assess the prevalence of renal artery stenosis (RAS) in subjects with type 2 diabetes and coexistent hypertension by using magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the renal arteries, to assess clinical and biochemical predictors of RAS, and to assess the hemodynamic significance of RAS, by using the captopril test (a measure of the response of plasma renin activity to a single oral dose of captopril). RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 117 subjects with type 2 diabetes and coexistent hypertension between 40 and 70 years of age and with creatinine concentrations < 150 micromol/l were recruited from two inner-city general diabetes clinics. All subjects underwent MRA of the renal arteries. In a subgroup of 85 subjects, data concerning possible clinical and biochemical predictors of RAS were collected, and the captopril test was performed. For comparison of a continuous variable between subjects with a positive MRA and those with a negative MRA, the Mann-Whitney test was used. For comparison of a discrete variable between subjects with a positive MRA and those with a negative MRA, Fisher's exact test was used. RESULTS: The prevalence of RAS detected by using MRA in 117 hypertensive type 2 diabetic subjects was 17%; 19 subjects had unilateral RAS, and only 1 subject had bilateral RAS. A femoral bruit was significantly more common in subjects with a positive MRA versus subjects with a negative MRA (21 vs. 0%; Fisher's exact test P < 0.005); however, other clinical features of atherosclerotic disease were not statistically associated. Greater duration of hypertension and treatment with statins were features of subjects with RAS (P < 0.05). The captopril test was negative in all subjects, although the antihypertensive response to oral captopril was significantly greater in subjects with RAS detected by MRA. CONCLUSIONS: RAS is common in hypertensive type 2 diabetic subjects. The presence of a femoral bruit is a useful predictive clinical marker. The captopril test is not useful in predicting the hemodynamic significance of RAS in this patient group.