OBJECTIVE: To analyze lipid profiles from a large sample of African-American patients with type 2 diabetes who receive care at an urban outpatient diabetes clinic. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Fasting serum lipid profiles of 4,014 African-Americans and 328 Caucasians with type 2 diabetes were retrieved from a computerized registry. American Diabetes Association criteria were applied to classify LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglyceride (TG) levels into risk categories. The proportion of patients who had none, one, two, and three lipoprotein concentrations outside of recommended clinical targets was examined. Multiple logistical regression analyses were performed to determine the influence of sex and race on the probability of having a lipid level outside of the recommended target. RESULTS: The percentages of African-Americans with high-, borderline-, and low-risk LDL cholesterol concentrations were 58, 26, and 16%, respectively, and the percentages for Caucasians were 54, 29, and 16%, respectively (P = 0.51). For HDL cholesterol, 41, 33, and 26% of African-Americans were in the high-, borderline-, and low-risk categories, respectively, compared with 73, 18, and 9% of Caucasians, respectively (P < 0.0001). Nearly 81% of African-Americans had TG concentrations that were in the low-risk category compared with only 50% of Caucasians. More women than men had high-risk LDL and HDL cholesterol profiles. The most common pattern of dyslipidemia was an LDL cholesterol level above target combined with an HDL cholesterol level below target, which was detected in nearly 50% of African-Americans and 42% of Caucasians. African-Americans had lower odds of having an HDL cholesterol or TG level outside of target. African-American women, compared to men, had greater probabilities of having abnormal levels of LDL and HDL, but a lower likelihood of having a TG level above goal. CONCLUSIONS: In a large sample of urban type 2 diabetic patients receiving care at a diabetes treatment program, race and sex differences in serum lipid profiles were present. Because hypertriglyceridemia was rare among African-American subjects, interventions will need to focus primarily on improving their LDL and HDL cholesterol levels. Further studies are required regarding how to best adapt these observed differences into more effective strategies to optimize lipid levels for this population of diabetic patients and to determine whether similar patterns of dyslipidemia occur in other clinical settings.