OBJECTIVE: Whether ACE inhibition is useful for type 2 diabetic patients with micro- and macroalbuminuria remains unknown. The Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetes, Hypertension, Microalbuminuria, Cardiovascular Events and Ramipril (DIABHYCAR) Study was set up to address this issue through a multicenter double-blind parallel placebo-controlled > or = 3-year trial in Europe and North Africa. In this article, we report the characteristics of the randomized patients. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The main selection criteria were as follows: men or women aged > or = 50 years with type 2 diabetes treated with oral antidiabetic drugs, with or without hypertension, with a plasma creatinine level < 150 mumol/l, and with persistent micro- or macroalbuminuria, as assessed centrally by two successive urine samples containing a urinary albumin concentration > or = 20 mg/l. Patient characteristics were studied by comparing patients who were randomized to those who were not, taking their geographical origin into account. RESULTS: There were 25,455 patients screened for urinary albumin (20,296 from France, 918 from Germany, 1,019 from Northwest Europe, 969 from Central Europe, 959 from Mediterranean Europe, and 1,294 from North Africa). Of these patients, 4,937 were randomized. Compared with the nonrandomized patients, the randomized patients were older, more often men, more obese, had higher systolic/diastolic blood pressure and plasma glucose, smoked more tobacco, drank more alcohol, and had complications more frequently. Using a logistic regression analysis, all the above-mentioned items appeared as independent determinants for randomization into the study, with the exception of alcohol intake. The contribution of each item varied slightly from one geographical origin to another. CONCLUSIONS: The physical, biological, and behavioral characteristics create a poor renal and cardiovascular prognosis for the type 2 diabetic patients randomized to the DIABHYCAR Study because of micro- and macroalbuminuria. Testing the usefulness of ACE inhibition for the type 2 diabetic patients with microalbuminuria seems feasible through the DIABHYCAR Study.