It has been known for years that cardiovascular disease frequently precedes the development of type 2 diabetes, and that atherosclerosis might not be a complication of type 2 diabetes, but rather the consequence of common genetic and environmental factors (the common soil' hypothesis). The insulin resistance syndrome (IRS) is a cluster of closely associated and interdependent abnormalities, including insulin resistance, hyperinsulinaemia, android fat distribution, progressive glucose intolerance, dyslipidaemia (increased triglycerides, decreased HDL, increased small dense LDL), increased prothrombotic and antifibrinolytic factors, and hypertension. Many of these abnormalities are risk factors for type 2 diabetes, and most of them explain the predilection for atherosclerosis to occur in conjunction with IRS. Insulin resistance is a key feature of IRS, and has been suggested to be the common pathophysiological basis of atherosclerosis and type 2 diabetes. The term 'insulin resistance' denotes resistance to insulin-mediated glucose uptake into skeletal muscle, which can be measured by the glucose clamp technique. There are, however, other less understood sites of abnormal insulin action that may also be relevant in IRS. These include liver, adipose, and kidney tissue, and systems such as muscle perfusion, antilipolysis, lipoprotein lipase activity, and cation transport. The development of clinical cardiovascular end-points in a patient with insulin resistance is complex, as it includes the degree of the defect, its associated abnormalities, its consequences, and the ability to compensate for the underlying defect. It is therefore more appropriate to consider the different facets and risk factors of IRS in aggregate, rather than seeking 'independent' effects. Accordingly, treatment of insulin resistance per se has not yet been shown to reduce the incidence of cardiovascular complications. At the cellular level, excess insulin is involved in various elements of atherogenesis. It interacts with cytokines and growth factors in a cross talk among vascular wall cells and a variety of mediators that play a role in the establishment of atheroma. Excess insulin also plays an important role in concert with lipoproteins when they exhibit an abnormal pattern and become modified by oxidation and glycation. It is therefore currently hoped that the introduction of a new class of insulin-sensitizing agents, the thiazolidinediones, may attenuate these processes. The thiazolidinediones act through ligand activation of a nuclear transcription factor, the peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma). Although this receptor was initially linked to lipid and glucose metabolism, recent data suggest that PPARgamma is also involved in the differentiation of mononuclear phagocytes, their inflammatory reactions, and macrophage conversion to foam cells. Thus, PPARgamma ligands may also be important regulators of monocyte/ macrophage gene expression during atherogenesis.