AIM: Protein tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP-1B) is an intracellular PTP known to dephosphorylate and inactivate upstream tyrosine phosphoproteins in the insulin signalling cascade. We and others reported increased abundance of catalytically impaired PTP-1B in tissue lysates from obese human subjects with and without type 2 diabetes, while genetic knockout of PTP-1B improves insulin sensitivity and prevents nutritionally mediated insulin resistance and obesity. The aim of the present work was to further elucidate the role of PTP-1B in glucose metabolism in vivo. METHODS: We used adenoviral constructs incorporating cDNAs for either wild-type (W/T) or a catalytically inactive C(215)S (C/S) mutant PTP-1B to achieve liver-selective PTP-1B overexpression in young Sprague-Dawley rats using tail vein injection, based on the high degree of hepatotropism of adenovirus 5 (Ad5). An Ad5-lacZ construct encoding beta-galactosidase was used as a control for viral effects alone. A hyperinsulinaemic euglycaemic clamp was used to study whole body glucose disposal and endogenous glucose production rates. RESULTS: Control studies in HIRcB cells confirmed catalytic activity and inactivity of W/T and C/S respectively. Mean PTP-1B abundance was 2.24 +/- 0.02- and 2.33 +/- 0.04-fold of saline-treated control in liver lysates of W/T and C/S rats respectively. Liver selective overexpression was confirmed by analysis of tissue lysates from liver, fat and muscle tissues. Ad5 treatment did not result in a statistically or clinically significant liver injury, as determined by serum alanine aminotransferase and histological examination. Seven days post injection, no significant difference in rate of weight gain, fasting blood glucose or insulin levels were seen in any group. Similarly, under steady-state glucose clamp conditions, glucose disposal rate (R(d)), endogenous glucose production rate (EGP) and serum insulin levels were similar in all groups. CONCLUSION: We conclude that moderate medium-term overabundance, to a degree resembling that seen in insulin-resistant states, of PTP-1B in liver tissue does not alter insulin action on glucose metabolism and that the major site of action of PTP-1B is presumably at insulin-responsive target tissue or tissues other than the liver.