The Oji-Cree population of the Sandy Lake region of Ontario, Canada, has the third highest prevalence of type 2 diabetes in the world. Changes in their diet and physical activity over the past half-century, particularly the marked increase in consumption of dietary fats, are felt to be important factors accounting for this epidemic. The aim of the present study was to examine the beta-cell response to a 48-h approximately twofold elevation of plasma free fatty acids (FFAs) (induced by Intralipid and heparin infusion) in members of the Sandy Lake Oji-Cree population (n = 12) and to compare the response to that in healthy age-matched nondiabetic Caucasian subjects (n = 16). The insulin secretion rate, insulin sensitivity index (S(I)), and disposition index (D(I)) (an index of insulin secretion that takes into account the ambient S(I)) were assessed in response to a 4-h graded intravenous glucose infusion followed by a 20 mmol/l 2-h hyperglycemic clamp. Total insulin secretory response to the graded glucose infusion did not change after a 48-h FFA elevation versus saline control in Caucasians and increased by approximately 30% in Oji-Cree individuals (P = 0.04 for difference between the two groups). Infusion of heparin-Intralipid reduced S(I) by approximately 40% in both groups (P = 0.002). Although D(I) was markedly reduced by heparin-Intralipid infusion in Caucasians (by approximately 40%), it was reduced by only 15% in Oji-Cree individuals (P = 0.03 for difference of response between the two groups). However, S(I) and D(I) in the Oji-Cree individuals were already much lower than in Caucasians at baseline, in keeping with the very high risk of type 2 diabetes in this population. It is concluded that Oji-Cree individuals from a community at very high risk for developing type 2 diabetes are not more susceptible to the FFA-induced desensitization of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion than healthy non-Natives and, in fact, appear to be less susceptible. Whether this reflects an inherent resistance to lipotoxicity or an already-present lipotoxic effect in this population will require further study.