 OBJECTIVE: To compare the glycemic control of inhaled insulin via the AERx insulin diabetes management system (iDMS) with that of subcutaneous (SC) insulin, both combined with NPH insulin at bedtime, in patients with type 2 diabetes. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The AERx iDMS uses a liquid insulin formulation to achieve flexible precise mealtime dosing (with increments corresponding to 1 IU administered subcutaneously) and ensures insulin delivery only when the breathing technique is optimal. This trial in patients with type 2 diabetes compared the glycemic control (HbA(1c)) achieved by inhaled insulin administered via AERx iDMS with that using SC insulin. This was a randomized, 12-week, open-label, parallel, multicenter, multinational trial in 107 nonsmoking patients with type 2 diabetes (mean age 59 years, mean duration of diabetes 11.9 years). Patients were randomized to receive either inhaled fast-acting human insulin via AERx iDMS immediately before meals or SC fast-acting human insulin administered 30 min before meals, both in combination with evening NPH insulin. RESULTS: Baseline and demographic characteristics were similar between the two groups. There was no statistically significant difference in HbA(1c) between the AERx and SC groups after 12 weeks of treatment (7.84 +/- 0.77 vs. 7.76 +/- 0.77%, P = 0.60). Fasting serum glucose was significantly lower in the AERx group compared with the SC group by the end of the trial (8.9 +/- 3.8 vs. 10.8 +/- 3.7 mmol/l, P = 0.01) with a similar NPH dose in the two groups (0.23 vs. 0.23 IU/kg, P = 0.93). There were no statistically significant differences between the two groups in the intra-subject variability of fasting or prandial blood glucose increment. Adverse events were similar in the two groups. No major safety concerns were raised during the trial. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with type 2 diabetes, preprandial inhaled insulin via AERx iDMS is as effective as preprandial SC insulin injection in achieving glycemic control with similar tolerability.