The mitochondrial uncoupling proteins (UCP-2 and UCP-3), which have been suggested to be involved in the development of obesity by controlling the energy expenditure (EE), were studied in 22 healthy first-degree relatives (FDRs) of patients with type 2 diabetes and 13 body mass index (BMI)- and age-matched healthy control subjects. Abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsies were obtained before and after 150-min hyperinsulinaemic clamp (average serum insulin 250 pM). Basal adipose tissue UCP-2 mRNA levels in the FDR group were significantly lower than that in the control group. After the hyperinsulinaemic clamp, adipose tissue UCP-2 mRNA levels were increased by 32% in the control group (p < 0.05) and 32% in the FDR group (p < 0.05). The basal adipose tissue UCP-3 mRNA level was similar in the two groups and increased in both the groups during hyperinsulinaemia (p < 0.001). Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry showed that despite similar BMI the FDR group had significantly higher fat mass (FM) per cent compared to that of the control group (p < 0.01). The UCP-2 mRNA expression was inversely correlated with the amount of adipose tissue (r = -0.53, p < 0.001), and multiple regression analysis revealed that only the amount of FM was independently correlated with basal UCP-2 mRNA levels, whereas age, gender nor family history of type 2 diabetes contributed independently to the variation in UCP-2 mRNA levels. No differences in EE were observed between the two groups, and no association between EE and UCP mRNA expression was found. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that adipose tissue UCP-2 and UCP-3 mRNA levels are significantly increased during a 150-min hyperinsulinaemic clamp. The UCP-2 mRNA levels were expressed at a significantly lower level FDR to type 2 diabetes compared to control subjects. However, in multiple regression analysis controlling for amount of adipose tissue, the difference between the two groups disappeared. Thus, only the amount of adipose tissue contributed independently to the variation in UCP-2 mRNA expression.