We recently described a primarily reduced palmitate oxidation in myotubes established from type 2 diabetic subjects, whereas triacylglycerol (TAG) accumulation seemed to be adaptive. However, it is still uncertain whether these changes are similar for saturated and unsaturated fatty acids and whether high concentrations of glucose and/or insulin may change this picture. Studies of palmitic acid and oleic acid metabolism in human myotubes established from control and type 2 diabetic subjects under conditions of acute high concentrations of insulin and/or glucose may solve these questions. Total oleic acid and palmitic acid uptake in myotubes was increased during acute insulin stimulation (P < 0.01) but not under acute, high-glucose concentrations, and no differences were found between the groups. Type 2 diabetic myotubes expressed a reduced palmitic acid oxidation to carbon dioxide (P </= 0.04), whereas oleic acid oxidation showed no differences between myotubes from both groups. High glucose concentrations decreased oleic acid oxidation (P </= 0.03). Lipid distribution was not different in diabetic and control myotubes when palmitic acid and oleic acid incorporation into cellular lipids was compared. Myotubes that were exposed to palmitic acid showed an increased palmitic acid incorporation into diacylglycerol (DAG) and TAG compared with myotubes that were exposed to oleic acid (P < 0.05) expressing an increased intracellular free fatty acid (FFA) level (P < 0.05). Lipid distribution was not affected by high glucose, whereas insulin increased FFAs, DAG, and TAG (P < 0.05). De novo lipid synthesis from glucose in both diabetic and control myotubes was of the same magnitude independent of glucose and insulin concentrations. These results indicate that palmitic acid and oleic acid are utilized in the same pattern in diabetic and control myotubes even though palmitic acid oxidation is primarily reduced in diabetic cells. Palmitic acid and oleic acid are handled differently by myotubes: Palmitic acid seems to accumulate as DAG and TAG, whereas oleic acid accumulates as intracellular FFAs. These observations indicate that oleic acid is preferable as fatty acid as it accumulates to a lesser extent as DAG and TAG than palmitic acid. Neither acute hyperglycemia nor de novo lipid synthesis from glucose seems central to the TAG accumulation in obesity or type 2 diabetes.