The clinical picture of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is formed by impairment in insulin secretion and resistance to insulin action. As a result of intensive efforts of the scientists around the world mutations and polymorphisms in a number of genes were linked with monogenic and polygenic forms of T2DM. Two major strategies were used in this research: genome scanning and the candidate gene approach. Monogenic forms, despite their rarity, constitute a field where substantial progress has been made in the dissection of the molecular background of T2DM. Monogenic forms of T2DM with profound defect in insulin secretion include subtypes of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY), maternally inherited diabetes with deafness (MIDD) caused by mitochondrial mutations, and rare cases resulting from insulin gene mutations. The majority of proteins associated with MODY are transcription factors, such as hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha), HNF-1alpha, insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1), HNF-1beta, and NEUROD1. They influence expression of the other genes through regulation of mRNA synthesis. Only MODY2 form is associated with glucokinase, a key regulatory enzyme of the beta cell. There are striking differences in the clinical picture of MODY associated with glucokinase and MODY associated with transcription factors. Three monogenic forms of T2DM characterized by severe insulin resistance are the consequence of mutations in the PPARgamma, ATK2, and insulin receptor genes. Patients with monogenic T2DM, particularly with MODY, sometimes, develop discrete extra-pancreatic phenotypes; for example, lipid abnormalities or a variety of cystic renal diseases. Efforts aiming to identify genes responsible for more common, polygenic forms of T2DM were less effective. These forms of T2DM have a middle/late age of onset and occur with both impaired insulin secretion and insulin resistance. Their clinical picture is created by the interaction of environmental and genetic factors, such as frequent polymorphisms of many genes, not just of one. These polymorphisms may be localized in the coding or regulatory parts of the genes and are present, although with different frequencies, in T2DM patients as well as in healthy populations. Sequence differences in a few genes have been associated, so far, with complex, polygenic forms of T2DM, for example, calpain 10, PPARgamma, KCJN11, and insulin. In addition, some evidence exists that genes, such as adiponectin, IRS-1, and some others may also influence the susceptibility to T2DM. It is expected that in the nearest future more T2DM susceptibility genes will be identified.