AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Inflammation is implicated in the development of type 2 diabetes and CHD, but the trigger of inflammation is unclear. Although in vitro and animal studies support a role of elevated levels of atherosclerotic lipoproteins in the activation of inflammation, plasma cholesterol cannot predict inflammatory markers in humans. Moreover, the association between inflammatory markers and other traditional risk factors of diabetes and CHD is unclear. To increase our knowledge of in vivo regulation of inflammation, we examined the association between several traditional risk factors and inflammatory markers. We hypothesised that because apolipoprotein B (ApoB) reflects atherogenic particle number, it is the primary predictor of inflammatory status. SUBJECTS, MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the association between several traditional risk factors and plasma high-sensitivity (hs) C-reactive protein (CRP), hsTNF-alpha, soluble TNF receptor 1, IL-6, orosomucoid, haptoglobin and alpha(1)-antitrypsin in 77 non-diabetic overweight and obese postmenopausal women. RESULTS: The inflammatory markers correlated positively with total and abdominal adiposity, blood pressure, 2-h OGTT glucose, insulin resistance, triglyceride, total/HDL cholesterol, ApoB, ApoB:apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1) ratio and Framingham CHD risk points. They correlated negatively with ApoA1, and total, LDL and HDL cholesterol. ApoB was an independent predictor of the interindividual variation in IL-6, hsCRP, orosomucoid, haptoglobin and alpha(1)-antitrypsin (R (2) range 8-40%); other risk factors were less predictive. Compared with BMI-matched control subjects, women with hyperapobetalipoproteinaemia (hyperapoB) had higher hsTNF-alpha, IL-6, hsCRP and orosomucoid (increase 17-104%). CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: ApoB is the primary predictor of inflammatory markers in postmenopausal overweight and obese women. Given elevated levels of inflammatory markers in hyperapoB women, we hypothesise that hyperapoB women may have an increased risk of developing both CHD and diabetes.