 AIM: PREDICTIVEtrade mark (Predictable Results and Experience in Diabetes through Intensification and Control to Target: An International Variability Evaluation) is a large, multi-national, observational study assessing the safety and efficacy of insulin detemir. We report the study design, population characteristics and baseline observations, including cross-sectional analysis, from 19 911 patients with type 1 or 2 diabetes. METHODS: Patients with type 1 or 2 diabetes requiring basal insulin are prescribed insulin detemir and followed up for 12-52 weeks. Data on demographics, haemoglobin A(1c) (HbA(1c)), fasting glucose, within-subject fasting glucose variability and weight are collected from patient records (and/or recall for hypoglycaemia). A negative binomial distribution model is used to assess the influence of predictive/confounding variables on hypoglycaemic episodes in insulin-treated patients at baseline. Multi-factorial analysis of covariance is used to evaluate the association of the variables with current body weight and within-subject fasting glucose variability. RESULTS: Total hypoglycaemic episodes in the 4 weeks prior to study start were 47.5 per patient-year in patients with type 1 and 9.2 per patient-year in patients with type 2 diabetes. The frequency of hypoglycaemia in insulin-treated patients showed a significant, positive association with duration of diabetes, number of insulin injections and fasting glucose variability but was inversely related to HbA(1c), fasting glucose and body mass index. Weight showed a significant positive association with gender (male > female) and insulin dosage. Weight was also positively associated with fasting glucose variability in patients with type 1 diabetes, and age and number of injections in patients with type 2 diabetes. CONCLUSIONS: These baseline data showed that, in addition to the established relationship with intensive treatment and HbA(1c), frequency of hypoglycaemia was positively associated with fasting glucose variability. Follow-up data from PREDICTIVE will provide insights on insulin detemir in diabetes management.