In the last 30 years we have seen considerable progress in the management of patients with diabetes, in particular with diabetic renal disease. A number of paradigms have been broken down, namely the following, as a consequence, clinical care has improved dramatically. . Significant renal involvement and albuminuria is rare in patients with essential hypertension. 2. High GFR is good for prognosis. 3. Only proteinuric diabetic patients have a poor prognosis. 4. Microalbuminuria only predicts renal disease. 5. Reducing blood pressure may cause low perfusion in the kidney and other organs with long-term negative effect, especially on the glomerular filtration rate. 6. Only in the presence of high blood pressure, should microalbuminuric patients receive anti-hypertensive treatment, including blockade of the RAS. 7. Only reducing blood pressure by blocking RAS in diabetes is relevant and justified. 8. Normoalbuminuria as indicated in the present definition is 'normal'. 9. ACE-I or ARB can only be used separately. 10. Diastolic blood pressure and later systolic pulse pressure are the best parameters for blood pressure recording. 11. Microalbuminuria is the strongest risk marker in patients with type 1 diabetes. 12. Screening for microalbuminuria is relevant, but follow-up was not proposed (also regarding microalbuminuria). In the present situation, it is well-known that patients with essential hypertension may sometimes have microalbuminuria, and it is known that it predicts a poor prognosis. Interestingly, in type 1 diabetes, hyperfiltration is a marker for poor prognosis related to metabolic control. Thus hyperfiltration is a marker for bad development, but microalbuminuria (below the proteinuric level) is also associated with a poor prognosis. It was originally believed that microalbuminuria only predicts renal disease. However, surprisingly it predicts as well cardiovascular disease and early mortality. The story about blood pressure and progression of renal disease is interesting, because it was earlier believed that a certain high blood pressure was mandatory for preservation of the renal function. This appeared to be a completely wrong concept. The data regarding microalbuminuria suggest that patients with microalbuminuria should receive anti-hypertensive treatment, even patients with so-called normal blood pressure. This was confirmed in several trials and also included in the guidelines. Reducing blood pressure is important, but it appeared to be especially beneficial to block the renin-angiontensin system, and it is clear that albuminuria is a continuous variable and is also a risk factor. Earlier it was suggested to use ACE-inhibitors or ARBs. Now it is clear that it is possible to use a combination, with good theoretical background. In the history of hypertension, it was earlier believed that diastolic blood pressure was most important, but later on it was generally accepted that systolic is a better predictor and the goal for treatment and pulse pressure may be even better. Not only is microalbuminuria an important risk marker, but it is as well clear that regression of microalbuminuria is a good marker for a better prognosis in patients. Microalbuminuria is believed to be the strongest risk factor, but new studies actually suggest that a simple parameter such as self-rated health is crucial along with other factors. Regarding new developments, it is clear that new studies have led to several advancements in management in patients, for instance the Steno II study shows positive effect on mortality by multifactorial intervention. Similarly, the ADVANCE study also showed positive effect on mortality by more intensified anti-hypertensive treatment with an ACE-inhibitor. We are eagerly awaiting the results from glucose arm in the ADVANCE study, especially in the light of the ACCORD study showing increased mortality with too strict glycemic control with a goal of 6% in HbA1c.