 AIMS: The purpose of this study is to assess the in vitro enzyme inhibition profile of DSP-7238, a novel non-cyanopyrrolidine dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP) IV inhibitor and to evaluate the acute and chronic effects of this compound on glucose metabolism in two different mouse models of type 2 diabetes. METHODS: The in vitro enzyme inhibition profile of DSP-7238 was assessed using plasma and recombinant enzymes including DPP IV, DPP II, DPP8, DPP9 and fibroblast activation protein alpha (FAPalpha) with fluorogenic substrates. The inhibition type was evaluated based on the Lineweaver-Burk plot. Substrate selectivity of DSP-7238 and comparator DPP IV inhibitors (vildagliptin, sitagliptin, saxagliptin and linagliptin) was evaluated by mass spectrometry based on the changes in molecular weight of peptide substrates caused by release of N-terminal dipeptides. In the in vivo experiments, high-fat diet-induced obese (DIO) mice were subjected to oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) following a single oral administration of DSP-7238. To assess the chronic effects of DSP-7238 on glycaemic control and pancreatic beta-cell damage, DSP-7238 was administered for 11 weeks to mice made diabetic by a combination of high-fat diet (HFD) and a low-dose of streptozotocin (STZ). After the dosing period, HbA1c was measured and pancreatic damage was evaluated by biological and histological analyses. RESULTS: DSP-7238 and sitagliptin both competitively inhibited recombinant human DPP IV (rhDPP IV) with K(i) values of 0.60 and 2.1 nM respectively. Neither vildagliptin nor saxagliptin exhibited competitive inhibition of rhDPP IV. DSP-7238 did not inhibit DPP IV-related enzymes including DPP8, DPP9, DPP II and FAPalpha, whereas vildagliptin and saxagliptin showed inhibition of DPP8 and DPP9. Inhibition of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) degradation by DSP-7238 was apparently more potent than its inhibition of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 10 (IP-10) or chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12 (SDF-1alpha) degradation. In contrast, vildagliptin and saxagliptin showed similar degree of inhibition of degradation for all the substrates tested. Compared to treatment with the vehicle, single oral administration of DSP-7238 dose-dependently decreased plasma DPP IV activity and improved glucose tolerance in DIO mice. In addition, DSP-7238 significantly decreased HbA1c and ameliorated pancreatic damage following 11 weeks of chronic treatment in HFD/STZ mice. CONCLUSIONS: We have shown in this study that DSP-7238 is a potent DPP IV inhibitor that has high specificity for DPP IV and substrate selectivity against GLP-1. We have also found that chronic treatment with DSP-7238 improves glycaemic control and ameliorates beta-cell damage in a mouse model with impaired insulin sensitivity and secretion. These findings indicate that DSP-7238 may be a new therapeutic agent for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.