 AIM: Orthostatic hypotension is a hallmark of diabetic autonomic neuropathy and is associated with increased mortality. The serum level of adiponectin is elevated in patients with heart failure or renal failure. In the present study, we measured serum levels of total and high molecular weight adiponectin in patients with Type 2 diabetes and orthostatic hypotension. We also investigated the relationship between the presence of orthostatic hypotension and various clinical variables in patients with Type 2 diabetes. METHODS: We studied 105 patients with Type 2 diabetes. Orthostatic hypotension was defined as a decrease of 20 mmHg or more in systolic blood pressure and/or 10 mmHg in diastolic blood pressure when blood pressure was measured for 3 min while standing. The brachial-ankle pulse-wave velocity was also measured as an index of arterial stiffness. RESULTS: Orthostatic hypotension was found in 30 patients with diabetes (28.6%). The haematocrit and estimated glomerular filtration rate were significantly lower in patients with orthostatic hypotension than in those without it. Brachial-ankle pulse-wave velocity and serum total and high molecular weight adiponectin were significantly higher in patients with orthostatic hypotension than in those without. Furthermore, the high molecular weight/total adiponectin ratio was higher in patients with orthostatic hypotension than in those without and hypertension was more common in patients with orthostatic hypotension. Plasma prothrombin F1 + 2, a coagulation maker, was higher in patients with orthostatic hypotension than in those without, while there were no differences of fibrinolytic markers between the two groups. Multivariate analysis showed that HDL cholesterol, haematocrit, F1 + 2, brachial-ankle pulse-wave velocity and a decline of systolic blood pressure on standing were independent determinants of high molecular weight adiponectin. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with Type 2 diabetes and orthostatic hypotension had an elevated serum level of high molecular weight adiponectin, which was associated with the simultaneous presence of renal dysfunction, anaemia, arterial stiffness and hypercoagulability.