 AIMS: Dehydroepiandrosterone exerts a protective effect against cardiovascular diseases. However, the relationship of dehydroepiandrosterone with the anticoagulant factor activated protein C, generated by the thrombin-thrombomodulin complex on vascular endothelial cells, remains unknown. This study aimed at studying the relationship between dehydroepiandrosterone and activated protein C generation in patients with Type 2 diabetes. METHODS: Sixty-two male patients with Type 2 diabetes were enrolled in this study. Data obtained from 40 healthy male subjects were used as controls. The plasma levels of dehydroepiandrosterone, the activated protein C-protein C inhibitor complex, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 were measured by enzyme immunoassays. Carotid intima-media thickness was measured by ultrasonography. RESULTS: The plasma levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (5.15 ± 2.81 vs. 3.76 ± 2.16 ng/ml; P < 0.005) and the activated protein C-protein C inhibitor complex (1.90 ± 1.07 vs. 1.02 ± 0.51 ng/ml; P < 0.001) were significantly lower in patients with diabetes than in normal subjects. Univariate analysis showed a significant correlation of the plasma level of dehydroepiandrosterone with that of the activated protein C-protein C inhibitor complex (r = 0.48, P < 0.001), high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (r = -0.30, P < 0.05) and with the mean intima-media thickness (r = -0.28, P < 0.05) in patients with diabetes. Stepwise multiple regression analysis showed that the plasma level of dehydroepiandrosterone is significantly correlated with the plasma levels of the activated protein C-protein C inhibitor complex (F = 18.06) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (F = 4.94). There was no correlation between the plasma levels of dehydroepiandrosterone and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that lower circulating levels of dehydroepiandrosterone are associated with decreased activated protein C generation and higher intima-media thickness in patients with Type 2 diabetes.