 AIMS: Some guidelines or studies consider haematuria an indication for renal biopsy or a potential cause of albuminuria that precludes accurate assessment of urinary albumin excretion. This study examined the justification of excluding haematuria in interpreting urinary albumin excretion in patients with Type 2 diabetes and its associations with other diabetes-related variables. METHODS: Between May and November 2008, patients with Type 2 diabetes at a single centre with data on urinary albumin excretion and urinalysis in the same urine sample were recruited. Urinary albumin excretion was determined by urine albumin/creatinine ratio in spot urine. Diagnosis of haematuria was made by positive urine occult blood from 1+ to 4+ and/or presence of more than nine red blood cells/ml in urinalysis. Demographic, anthropometric, clinical and laboratory variables and diabetes-associated complications were analysed. RESULTS: In total, 743 patients were enrolled. Prevalence of haematuria among patients with normoalbuminuria, microalbuminuria, or macroalbuminuria was 8.7% (n = 13), 16.1% (n = 67) and 35.8% (n = 64), respectively. Urine albumin/creatinine ratio was significantly higher, while macroalbuminuria was more common in patients with haematuria (n = 144) than in those without (n = 599). Multiple regression analysis identified urine albumin/creatinine ratio (odds ratio 1.33, P = 0.01) and macroalbuminuria (odds ratio 2.66, P = 0.01) as the only independent predictors of haematuria. Moreover, urine albumin/creatinine ratio was an independent predictor of haematuria in the macroalbuminuria subgroup (odds ratio 1.30, P = 0.04). CONCLUSIONS: Increased urine albumin/creatinine ratio and macroalbuminuria were the only independent predictors of haematuria in patients with Type 2 diabetes, raising questions on the justifications of excluding haematuria in interpreting urinary albumin excretion in patients with Type 2 diabetes and including haematuria as an indication for renal biopsy in those with macroalbuminuria.