ACCESSIBLE SUMMARY: •  This is a literature review of 16 studies about care requirements for persons with psychotic disorders and risk of or existing type 2 diabetes. The studies together indicate that mental health nurses play an important role in motivating diabetes care as they are often known to and trusted by the persons. •  A holistic approach to the person's health, with close follow-ups in psychiatric care and cooperation with diabetes care, may have benefits for the diabetes care. •  Screening for and treating psychotic symptoms is an important task for mental health nurses, as these symptoms drain energy from the person and prevent diabetes self-care. Antipsychotic medication increases the need for follow-ups of glycaemic control. •  Lifestyle and diabetes education needs to be practical, adapted to the individual and focused on maintaining a healthy diet, taking exercise, changing smoking habits and preventing diabetes complications. ABSTRACT: This literature review aimed to explore previous knowledge about specific care requirements for persons with psychotic disorders and risk of or existing type 2 diabetes. Sixteen qualitative and quantitative studies in the area were identified and summarized. The studies together indicate that mental health nurses play an important role in motivating people to perform diabetes care as they are often known to and trusted by the patients. A holistic approach to the person's health, with close follow-ups by psychiatric care and cooperation with diabetes care, may have benefits for the person with diabetes. Screening for and treating psychotic symptoms is an important task for the mental health nurse, as these symptoms drain energy from the person and prevent diabetes self-care. Lifestyle and diabetes education needs to be practical, adapted to the individual and focused on maintaining a healthy diet, regular exercise, changing smoking habits and preventing diabetes complications. Treatment with antipsychotic drugs increases the need for follow-ups of glycaemic control.