The prevalence of diabetes mellitus has grown to staggering numbers, and its incidence is expected to rise in the next 2 decades. The need for novel approaches to treat hyperglycemia cannot be ignored. Current agents have been shown to modestly improve glycemia and in some cases prevent complications of diabetes, but they become less effective over time and are often accompanied by undesirable adverse effects. Dapagliflozin is the lead agent in a new class of oral antidiabetic agents known as sodium-glucose cotransporter type 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, which represent a novel approach to the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus. By selectively and reversibly blocking the SGLT2 receptor, dapagliflozin prevents the reabsorption of glucose at the renal proximal tubule. Phase II and III clinical trials have demonstrated that dapagliflozin is a safe and effective method for treating type 2 diabetes. Dapagliflozin produces a sustained, dose-dependent reduction in plasma glucose levels while simultaneously improving insulin secretion and sensitivity. Over 12-24 weeks, reductions in hemoglobin A(1c)  ranged from 0.54-0.89% when dapagliflozin was administered once/day (either as monotherapy or add-on therapy to oral antidiabetic drugs with or without insulin) to patients with type 2 diabetes. Therapy with dapagliflozin also results in a mild osmotic-diuretic effect that may account for decreases in total body weight (~2-3 kg) and blood pressure (systolic 2-5 mm Hg, diastolic 1.5-3 mm Hg), and increases in hematocrit (1-2%). Dapagliflozin has a favorable safety profile, with the rates of hypoglycemia similar to those of placebo. Genital and urinary tract infections were more commonly reported in patients taking dapagliflozin (2-13%) than those taking placebo (0-8%). Dapagliflozin does not appear to cause electrolyte disturbances, hepatotoxicity, or nephrotoxicity. Results from clinical trials have been promising, and well-designed clinical programs that address the long-term safety and efficacy of dapagliflozin are under way.