 BACKGROUND: There is evidence that diabetic polyneuropathy (PNP) is associated with reduced bone mineral density (BMD) in type 1 diabetes but little is known about the impact of diabetic PNP on bone metabolism in type 2 diabetes. OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate differences in bone metabolism by measuring markers of bone turnover and BMD in men and postmenopausal women with type 2 diabetes and diabetic PNP compared with those without PNP. Gender differences were analyzed for both groups of patients. METHODS: One hundred twenty patients with type 2 diabetes, 68 without PNP (43 men, 25 women, mean age 62 [8] years) and 52 with PNP (28 men, 24 women, mean age 64 [8] years) were studied. Clinical parameters with bone turnover biomarkers such as osteocalcin, bone alkaline phosphatase, procollagen type 1 amino-terminal propeptide, and carboxy-terminal telopeptide of type 1 collagen were measured in all patients. Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry to evaluate BMD was performed in a subgroup of patients. RESULTS: After controlling for age, body mass index, duration of diabetes, smoking, glycosylated hemoglobin, homeostasis model assessment index for insulin resistance, serum C-reactive protein, creatinine, calcium, gamma-glutamyltransferase, parathyroid and sex hormones levels, presence of micro/macrovascular complications, statin- as well as diabetes-related therapies, levels of carboxy-terminal telopeptide of type 1 collagen and procollagen type 1 amino-terminal propeptide were significantly higher among patients with PNP when compared with patients without PNP (P = 0.01 and P = 0.03, respectively). Differences in bone biomarkers were more pronounced among men with diabetes. BMD did not differ significantly between patients with and without PNP, independent of gender. CONCLUSIONS: Male patients with PNP exhibit a higher rate of bone turnover than men without PNP. High rate of bone turnover increases the susceptibility for developing osteoporosis. Prevention of diabetic PNP might also reduce the incidence of osteoporosis and fractures in patients with type 2 diabetes.