Complex diagnosis of muscular dystrophies including clinical, bioptical and molecular genetic approaches has been provided in a limited extent in this country. Our group of neurologists, pathologists and geneticists has examined approximately 240 patients suspected of having muscular dystrophies, mostly coming from Southern and Northern Moravia. The patients were sent to the examination most often from departments of neurology and clinical genetics, and less frequently from departments of internal medicine. According to the final diagnosis, the patients were divided into groups: with dystrophinopathies and carriers of dystrophinopathies (DMD/BMD), merosin deficient form of congenital muscular dystrophy, and Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy including the carriers of this disease. Some relatives of patients with dystrophinopathies were also examined using the methods of segregation analysis. High proportion of the DMD/BMD patients can be detected by the methods of molecular genetics. Analysis of mRNA using RT PCR and PTT enables the detection of deletions, duplications, and point mutations in dystrophin gene and encompasses a larger diagnostic scope in comparison with examinations of DNA level by the multiplex PCR method from the peripheral blood which enables only deletion detections. Immunophenotyping of the dystrophin protein plays an important role especially using antibodies against carboxyterminal (DYS2) and rod domain (DYS1) of dystrophin. Deficient sarcolemmal expression of DYS2 and DYS1 reveals unambiguously a pathological dystrophin. On the other hand, less pronounced deficiencies in dystrophin expression in BMD patients and DMD/BMD carriers may not always be detected in muscle biopsies. In this case, it is necessary to supplement the examination by Western blotting and genotype analysis. The examination of patients with clinically diagnosed muscular dystrophy should start with a muscle biopsy which enables the estimation of presence and degree of structural changes. Application of antibodies against the components of DGC and emerin may reveal a deficiency in expression of these proteins. Immunohistochemical examination completed by Western blotting leads to the subsequent molecular genetic analysis of DNA or mRNA. Secondary deficiencies in expression of other DGC proteins are often revealed in muscle biopsies of dystrophinopathies and this fact must be taken into account in the evaluation of immunohistochemical findings. There is a possibility of replacement of invasive muscle biopsy by skin biopsy or buccal mucosal smears in cases of merosin and emerin deficiencies. Commercially available antibodies against merosin, emerin, calpain and sarcoglycans enable extensive identification and detailed classification of muscular dystrophies. Screening of the patients based on the application of methods described and discussed in this report is the task of the forthcoming period.