We describe the early manifestation and sequential assessment of the central and peripheral nervous system in a Japanese girl with merosin-deficient congenital muscular dystrophy. She showed severe hypotonia (''floppy infant") and suffered mild respiratory failure postnatally. Serum creatine kinase was elevated to 11,487 IU/L. The muscle biopsy showed dystrophic changes with negative expression of merosin (laminin α2), thereby confirming merosin-deficient congenital muscular dystrophy. Her motor milestones were severely delayed, but she could sit without support at the age of 3 years. After 3 years, her motor ability deteriorated and by the age of 5 years, she could not sit and control her neck. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 2 months of age revealed patterns that were appropriate for her age. At 1 year of age, the T2 weighted images showed diffuse high signal intensities throughout the centrum semiovale, and periventricular and subcortical white matter of the frontal and occipital lobes, while the U fibers, the corpus callosum and the internal capsule were spared. At the age of 7 years, these white matter abnormalities decreased. MR spectroscopy (MRS) revealed normal values of N-acetylaspartate (NAA)/creatine (Cr) and choline (Cho)/Cr metabolite ratios as well as slightly increased myoinositol (mI)/Cr metabolite ratios. Neurophysiological motor nerve conduction velocity (MCV) and compound muscle action potential (CMAP) of the median nerve were in the normal range at the age of 2 months. After the child reached 1 year of age, the MCV and CMAP lagged behind those of healthy controlled children. The sensory nerve conduction velocity of the median nerve demonstrated a mild delay at the age of 15 months. It improved to normal range at the age of 6 years but decreased at 7 years of age. These sequential findings suggest not only that muscular degeneration and dysmyelination had occurred but also that various other factors, including demyelination and the vasogenic system, may influence the pathology of MDC1A.