CONTEXT: GH secretion and response to GH replacement are gender-related. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of GH deficiency (GHD) and replacement on the cardiovascular system according to gender. DESIGN: The design was open and prospective. SETTING: The study was conducted at a university hospital. SUBJECTS: Subjects included 36 severe adult-onset GHD patients (18 men, 20 women, aged < 45 yr); 36 gender-, age-, and body mass index-matched healthy subjects served as controls. INTERVENTIONS: Subjects received GH replacement at a median dose of 6.5 microg/kg.d in men and 7.7 microg/kg.d in women for 2 yr. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Homeostasis model assessment index, total to HDL cholesterol ratio, fibrinogen and C-reactive protein levels, left ventricular mass index, blood pressure, heart rate, diastolic filling, and systolic function at rest and at peak exercise and intima-media thickness (IMT) at common carotid arteries were measured. RESULTS: Basal prevalence and/or degree of insulin resistance, lipid alterations, compromised cardiac function, and IMT were similar in women and men. Diastolic dysfunction was more prevalent in men (61 vs. 25%, P = 0.036). After GH replacement, IGF-I levels normalized in all patients. Lipid profile, fibrinogen, and C-reactive protein levels normalized in all cases. The total to HDL ratio (P = 0.04) was higher in women than men. The homeostasis model assessment index persisted higher in GHD patients than controls and decreased only in GHD men (P = 0.017). Left ventricular mass index normalized during treatment in both women and men, abnormal diastolic function persisted in three women (P = 0.031), and abnormal systolic performance persisted in six women and one man (P = 0.13). IMT decreased similarly in women and men, persisting higher than in controls. Exercise performance normalized in all. CONCLUSIONS: Two-year GH replacement has similar beneficial effects on cardiac and exercise performance and atherosclerosis in women and men with severe GHD.