BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Along with the recent changes in lifestyle in Japan, the incidence of coronary artery disease has increased while the incidence of stroke appears to be decreasing. We investigated the relation between the progression of carotid atherosclerosis and the severity of coronary artery disease in the Japanese population. METHODS: The 2-year change in extracranial carotid atherosclerosis in 50 Japanese patients who underwent coronary angiography was evaluated using carotid echotomography. To quantify the extent of carotid atherosclerosis, the maximal thickness measurements of all plaques were summed for an individual plaque score, except for new plaques found on reexamination. Carotid disease progression was evaluated by the sum of plaque score change and the thickness of the new plaque found on reexamination. RESULTS: The plaque score changed by -3.2 to 10.1 mm (mean +/- SD, 1.06 +/- 2.42 mm). The extent of coronary atherosclerosis (p less than 0.02) and serum total cholesterol level (p less than 0.01) were different between the progressing (n = 17) and the nonprogressing (n = 30) groups of carotid atherosclerosis when the progressing group included the patients with a delta plaque score of greater than or equal to 1.0 mm. Neither age, serum triglyceride level, serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level, pack-years of smoking, percentage of smokers, percentage of hypertensive patients, nor percentage of diabetic patients was different between the two groups. Carotid disease progression was significantly higher in patients with three-vessel coronary disease than in patients without significant coronary artery disease (p less than 0.005). There was a significant positive linear correlation between carotid disease progression and Gensini's coronary artery disease score (R = 0.411, p less than 0.005). CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed that severe coronary artery disease and a high serum total cholesterol level were strong predictors for carotid disease progression in Japanese patients with high rates of coronary artery disease.