Nephrosclerosis, commonly found in subjects with hypertension and diabetes, is marked by hyalinization of arterioles and fibroplasia of small arteries in the renal cortex. Cardiovascular risk factors that predicted subsequent hyalinization of renal arterioles at autopsy were identified, using data from the Honolulu Heart Program, a prospective epidemiological study of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in Japanese-American men. Among 8006 participants at baseline, 1381 died between 1965 and 1982; 285 of these had a protocol autopsy, and 150 had assessments of arteriolar hyalinization from renal tissue. Subjects were categorized into four groups on the basis of the number of hyalinized arterioles per square centimeter of renal tissue, and CVD risk factor levels and proportions were compared across these groups with the use of general linear models and logistic regression. Multivariate assessment using logistic regression demonstrated that diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and glucose level were positively associated and alcohol intake was negatively associated with an elevated degree of renal arteriolar hyalinization, independent of other CVD risk factors. The odds ratios for elevated hyalinization associated with a 10-mm Hg increase in DBP, a 20-mg/dL increase in glucose level, and a 30-mL/d increase in alcohol intake were 1.97 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.24-3.12), 1.23 (95% CI = 1.07-1.41), and 0.24 (95% CI = 0.11-0.55), respectively. Associations were similar when prevalent cases of CVD were excluded and when autopsy selection bias was taken into account. Renal arteriolar hyalinization was also more strongly associated with atherosclerosis in the larger cerebral vessels (Spearman's r = .59, P < .001) than in the coronary arteries (r = .16, P = .073) and aorta (r = .24, P = .022). Hyalinization was significantly related to cardiovascular-renal mortality, and this association was accounted for by other CVD risk factors. These findings suggest that blood pressure, glucose level, and alcohol intake are independent predictors of hyalinization in renal arterioles and that this type of renal vasculopathy may be a marker for atherosclerosis in other vascular regions, particularly the cerebral vessels. The protective association involving alcohol and the possibility that renal arteriolar hyalinization may be an indicator of cerebral atherosclerosis may warrant investigation in other populations.