BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: It has been proposed that patients with Marfan syndrome have an increased prevalence of intracranial aneurysms. This proposition is based on 10 clinical reports, 1 pathology case, and an autopsy series of 7 patients. By contrast, 5 clinical series of Marfan patients have failed to document any such relationship. We present our institution's autopsy and clinical experience with Marfan syndrome and analyze in our patient population the purported association between this condition and intracranial aneurysms. METHODS: The results of an autopsy series at the Johns Hopkins Hospital of 25 confirmed Marfan syndrome patients from 1939 to the present were reviewed retrospectively. The prevalence of intracranial aneurysms in this Marfan syndrome autopsy series was compared with that in the autopsy population at this institution and with that in the general autopsy population as reported in the literature. In addition, the prevalence of Marfan syndrome in a recent neurosurgical series of 710 consecutive aneurysm cases (1990-1998) was determined. RESULTS: Of the 25 autopsy cases, only 1 had evidence on autopsy of an unruptured, 2-mm aneurysmal dilatation at the anterior communicating artery complex. Three autopsy patients suffered intracranial hemorrhages but had negative angiography and postmortem examinations for intracranial aneurysms. The remaining 21 patients had negative autopsies for intracranial hemorrhages or intracranial aneurysms. The neurosurgical series of 710 patients treated for intracranial aneurysms did not include any patient with Marfan syndrome. CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of 1 patient of 25 with an intracranial aneurysm is not statistically different from the 1.3% prevalence of intracranial aneurysms in the autopsy population at this institution (P=0.24) or from the 2.0% prevalence of intracranial aneurysms in the general autopsy population (P=0.31). We therefore conclude that there exists no evidence that Marfan syndrome is associated with an increased prevalence of intracranial aneurysms.