OBJECTIVE: Aneurysms of the aortic root lead to aortic valve incompetence due to dilatation of the sinotubular junction and annuloaortic ectasia. Reimplantation of the native, structurally intact aortic valve within a Dacron tube graft corrects annular ectasia as well as dilatation of sinotubular junction and aortic sinuses. Durability of this valve repair with respect to increased mechanical stress on valve cusps is discussed controversially and is yet unknown. METHODS: Since 7/93, replacement of the ascending aorta with repair of the aortic valve was performed in 48 patients (34 male, 14 female; 47+/-20 years) with aortic insufficiency and aneurysm of the aortic root. Fifteen patients (31%) had Marfan's syndrome and five patients (10%) had an aortic dissection type A (two acute, three chronic). In 11 patients (23%), concomitant replacement of the aortic arch was necessary utilizing elephant trunk technique in two patients. Additionally, one patient required mitral valve repair and two other patients coronary artery bypass grafts. Clinical and echocardiographic follow-up was performed in 6-12 month intervals for a cumulative study period of 100 patient years. RESULTS: There were no operative deaths. Two patients (4%) died 5 and 20 months postoperatively. One additional patient experienced a TIA within the first postoperative week. Three patients (6%) with an early postoperative aortic insufficiency (AI) > 1 required aortic valve replacement after 9, 11, and 14 months due to progressive AI. In these patients, distortion of the aortic root geometry led to valve incompetence. All other patients have no or mild aortic insufficiency. The repair now remains stable for up to 63 months (mean 25+/-18 months). Other valve related complications did not occur. CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that this type of aortic valve repair achieves excellent results in selected patients. Perfect coaptation of valve cusps during the repair with no or only trace AI at initial echocardiography seems to be essential for durability.