 PURPOSE: Aneurysms of the innominate artery (AIA) are widely considered to be a rare entity. We describe our experience with AIAs in the last three decades. METHODS: From October 1973 to October 2000, we operated on 27 patients with an AIA. The underlying cause of aneurysm was Takayasu's disease in 7 patients, degenerative disease in 6 patients, syphilis in 5 patients, chronic dissection in 3 patients, trauma in 2 patients, infection in 2 patients, a postoperative complication in 1 patient, and Marfan syndrome in 1 patient. AIA was associated with an aortic aneurysm in 17 patients. Fourteen patients had no symptoms. The remaining patients had symptoms, with thromboembolic complications in 7 patients, pain without rupture in 3 patients, and a ruptured aneurysm in 3 patients. In two patients at high risk for surgery who had a small AIA with embolic complications, a cervical approach was used as a means of performing distal exclusion and crossover bypass. In the remaining 25 patients, a midline sternotomy was used. One patient with a ruptured AIA exsanguinated during sternotomy. Ten patients underwent a prosthetic replacement of the ascending aorta and/or aortic arch with a separate prosthetic branch to the innominate artery (IA). Thirteen patients underwent ascending aorta-to-IA prosthetic bypass in association with lateral suture (8 patients) or prosthetic patching (5 patients) of the aorta. One patient with an infected aneurysm was treated by means of resection of the aneurysm, proximal ligation of the IA, and transposition of the right into the left common carotid artery. Cardiopulmonary bypass with deep hypothermic circulatory arrest was used in 10 patients. RESULTS: Three perioperative deaths occurred (2 of 4 in association with emergency treatment and 1 of 23 with elective treatment). Respiratory complications requiring prolonged artificial ventilation developed in five patients. Two patients had transient worsening of preoperative neurologic deficits. Late results, with a mean follow-up of 85 months, were good. CONCLUSION: The etiology and presentation of AIAs are variable. Surgical management with current cardiovascular techniques achieves excellent results.