BACKGROUND: Redo composite valve graft replacement remains a challenging problem, that may lead to increased surgical mortality. METHODS: In our experience from September 1976 through December 1999, eight consecutive patients (seven men and 1 woman) underwent eight redo composite valve graft replacements. The mean age at reoperation was 43.1 years (range 31 to 51 years). Seven patients had stigmata of Marfan's syndrome. Reoperation was indicated for pseudoaneurysm formation in five patients, coronary ostial aneurysms in two patients, and active fungal endocarditis in one patient. Previous root replacement had been performed in all eight patients using a composite mechanical valve. The techniques used at previous procedures were the Bentall technique in seven and Carrel's button technique in one. The mean interval between primary root replacement and redo root replacement was 10 years (range 2 to 18 years). The patient with active fungal endocarditis having a stuck valve was subjected to emergency operation. RESULTS: The techniques used at the reoperations included Carrel's button technique in five patients, the interposition technique (Phieler) in two patients, and Cabrol's technique in one patient. Aortic arch aneurysm repair was performed in five patients. There were two hospital deaths (2 [25%] of 8). One patient died on postoperative day 1 with low cardiac output and the other suffered a sudden cardiac arrest on postoperative day 14. The mean follow-up was 34.6 months (range 1 to 85 months). There was one late death. The cause of death was multiple organ failure due to recurrence of fungal endocarditis 6 months after redo composite and total arch replacement. CONCLUSION: Redo composite graft replacement can be accomplished with lower early mortality, and therefore, this operation should not be delayed given the appropriate clinical circumstances. Many causes of failure of composite valve graft replacement can be avoided if the appropriate surgical technique is chosen.