The present study determines the effect of surgical treatment of cardiovascular manifestations of Marfan syndrome in 72 patients by 114 operations, during 34-year period. This therapy resulted in aortic root repair, aortic arch replacement, or both in 78, mitral valve repair in 9, descending thoracic aortic replacement in 14, thoracoabdominal aortic replacement in 10, and abdominal aortic replacement in 6, including total aortic replacement in 4 and nearly total aortic replacement in 4 patients. Fusiform aneurysms were present in the the ascending aorta in 37, the aortic arch in 2, the thoracoabdominal aorta in 2, and the abdominal aorta in 6 patients. Aortic dissection occurred in 40 (55.6%), including type A aortic dissection in 29 patients. Aortic root repair included separate valve-graft in 8, Bentall composite valve-graft in 25, composite valve-graft with button technique in 26, composite valve-graft with interposition graft technique in 10, and valve sparing procedure in 5 patients. The overall early (30-day) mortality was 7.9%. The early survival was 75% in separate valve-graft procedure and 99.2% in composite valve-graft procedure. Late coronary dehiscence did not occur in the patients with Bentall technique in which the reattachments of coronary ostia were performed in 2 layers, but occurred in 50% of patients with the coronary anastomoses in 1 layer. Aortic valve regurgitation relapsed in 2 of the 5 patients with valve sparing procedure. Event free rate for the patients with composite valve-graft using button technique was 81.1% at 10 years. There were 14 late deaths; dissection or rupture of the residual aorta, composite graft endocarditis and cardiac failure were the principle causes of late deaths. In conclusion, Marfan patients with cardiovascular diseases can undergo surgical treatment with a low operative risk and low morbidity. Although late endocarditis remains a serious problem, we believe that Marfan syndrome is a contraindication for valve sparing procedure. Because of the potential for late dissection or aneurysm in other areas of the aorta, patients with Marfan syndrome should have serial computed tomographic scans indefinitely.