 BACKGROUND: At first glance the aortic valve is a relative simple valve mechanism connecting the left ventricle and the ascending aorta. Detailed analysis of the different components of the aortic valve including the leaflets and sinuses revealed a complex motion of each part leading to a perfect durable valve mechanism at rest and during exercise. Theoretically, the reconstruction or imitation of these structures in patients with aortic valve disease should lead to optimal results. Prerequisite is the exact knowledge of the important functional characteristics of the aortic valve. The dynamic behavior of the aortic root closely harmonizing with the leaflets not only warrants stress minimizing and valve durability, but also optimizes coronary flow, left ventricular function and aortic impedance. The newly discovered contractile capacity of the leaflets and the root components are important for tuning the dynamics. AORTIC VALVE RECONSTRUCTION: Isolated reconstruction of the aortic valve such as decalcification, commissurotomy, plication of ring or leaflets of a tricuspid aortic valve and cusp extension are seldom indicated in contrast to the reconstruction of the bicuspid insufficient valve. Proper indication and skilled techniques lead to excellent hemodynamic and clinical intermediate-term result up to 7 years after reconstruction. Latest follow-up revealed a mean aortic insufficiency of 0.7, maximal pressure gradient of 11.4 +/- 8.5 mm Hg with zero hospital or late mortality, reoperation or thromboembolic events in 22 patients. The reconstructive techniques for aortic root aneurysm and/or type A dissection according to David or Yacoub have become routine procedures in the last 10 years. The hemodynamic and clinical results are excellent with low reoperation rate and very low risk of thromboembolism. Generally, a maximal diameter of the root of 5 cm is indicative for performing the operation. In patients with Marfan's syndrome the reconstruction should be advanced even with smaller diameters especially if these are progressive and combined with aortic insufficiency. ROSS-OPERATION: The Ross-Operation includes the replacement of the diseased aortic valve with the pulmonary autograft and reconstruction of the right ventricular outflow tract using a homograft. The hemodynamic results are excellent regarding the autograft and also the clinical results with very low thromboembolic risk and acceptable reoperation rate. This method is especially indicated for active young patients, women, who desire children, athletes and patients in general, who like to avoid long-term anticoagulation. In some cases the homograft may develop a dysfunction predominantly a pulmonary stenosis requiring reoperation. In the author's series of 245 Ross-operations in 12 years the homograft had to be replaced in 4 cases without letality. Innovative, decellularized homografts with the potential to repopulate with autologeous cells show promising results after 1 year of clinical implantation without signs of antibody development. Probably these tissue-engineered modification may improve the homograft results. The reconstructive techniques of the aortic valve and the Ross-operation have a certain risk of reoperation that must be weighed against the advantages of very low hospital and late valve related death, excellent hemodynamics, very low risk of macro- and microembolism as well as bleeding, lack of long-term anticoagulation and unrestricted life-style.