BACKGROUND: Hypothermic bypass with circulatory arrest for thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm (TAAA) repair is employed for its protective effect on spinal cord function and because it avoids clamping the diseased aorta. However, organ dysfunction caused by reperfusion injury as well as bleeding tendencies due to deep hypothermia have been described. In this paper we compared the efficacies of the hypothermic and normothermic operations. METHODS: Between February 1996 and June 2000, 28 patients underwent thoracoabdominal aortic repair. Twenty-three patients were men, 5 were women, and the median age was 55.3 (range 23 to 75 years). Fourteen patients had aortic dissection, and 7 had Marfan syndrome. Fourteen patients required reconstruction of visceral arteries. Twelve patients underwent TAAA repair under deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (H group), and 15 under normothermic distal perfusion (N group), while 1 patient underwent a simple clamp procedure. Perioperative data and early outcomes were compared between groups. RESULTS: The overall 30-day mortality rate was 0%, but 3 patients (25.0%) in II group, and 1 patient (6.3%) in N group died during hospital stay. Operation time and bypass time were longer in H group than N group (operative time 793 min vs. 481 min (p < 0.05): cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) time 255 min vs. 102 min (p < 0.05). Also, more intraoperative bleeding was found in H group than in N group (3,506 ml vs. 1,220 ml). Spinal cord neurologic deficit did not occur in either group. Respiratory failure occurred in 3 patients (25.0%) in H group and one (6.3%) in N group. Renal failure occurred in 3 (25.0%) in H group, and none in N group. CONCLUSION: Early and mid-term outcome of TAAA repair was almost satisfactory and without neurospiral complications. The deep hypothermic operation is more likely to induce postoperative respiratory and renal dysfunction than the normothermic operation. TAAA repair using deep hypothermic circulatory arrest should be limited to patients with TAAA involving the distal arch or a severely calcified aortic wall.