BACKGROUND: Introduction of the modified Bentall procedure with the button technique has reduced but not eliminated anastomotic complications in patients receiving a composite aortic conduit. Particularly the true incidence of coronary ostial complications such as stenosis, kinking or pseudoaneurysm formation needs to be assessed. METHODS: We reviewed 71 patients receiving a composite aortic conduit from November 1993 to November 1999 for chronic aneurysms (n = 51) or aortic dissection (n = 20), 12 of whom had Marfan syndrome. Patients were divided into two groups according to variations in the surgical technique. In group 1 (30 patients; 42%) the classic modified Bentall operation with the button technique was employed whereas in group 2 (41 patients; 58%) some technical modifications were added mainly consisting of a reinforcement suture joining the cut edge of the aortic wall and the prosthetic sewing ring and suture of the coronary buttons with an "endo-button" technique. To detect potential procedure-related complications particularly at the coronary ostia anastomoses follow-up included transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography every 6 months and computerized tomographic angiography at 12 months or whenever indicated; in 20 patients a magnetic resonance imaging angiography and standard aortography with selective coronary angiography were also added. RESULTS: At a mean follow-up of 49 +/- 19 months anastomotic complications occurred in 4 patients (6%): in 2 a pseudoaneurysm developed at the distal aortic suture line and in 1 a pseudoaneurysm developed at the right coronary ostium after repair of acute aortic dissection; in 1 Marfan patient an aneurysm of the left coronary ostium developed. Such complications were unrelated to the two surgical techniques used in this series for reimplantaion of the coronary ostia. CONCLUSIONS: The modified Bentall operation is associated with an extremely low incidence of anastomotic complications particularly at the coronary ostia. More extensive use of new imaging techniques is desirable to assess the true incidence of such complications in patients receiving a composite aortic conduit.