Inherited metabolic disorders contribute importantly to adverse cardiovascular outcomes and affect all tissue types. This review summarizes some of the more important aspects. In the venous system, heterozygosities for the factor V Leiden and prothrombin 20210G > A mutations are common and occur in 4% and 1%, respectively, of caucasians. They confer a 2- to 3- fold increase in risk of venous, but not arterial, thrombosis. Marfan syndrome affects the systemic circulation and has a population prevalence of about 1 in 4000. The more than 200 mutations responsible are in the fibrillin-1 gene (15q21.1) and mediate the characteristic skeletal, lens and aortic changes. There are two potentially lethal inherited disorders of cardiac conduction, the long QT and Brugada syndromes. The prevalence for each is about 1 in 10,000. On the other hand, autosomal dominant hypertrophic cardiomyopathies are relatively common, at 1 in 500, but with variable penetrance. Mutations are in the sarcomere proteins and more than 140 are known. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may be confused with Fabry disease, for which effective treatment is now available. Mutations in several genes have been shown to produce dilated cardiomyopathy in the young, but there is as yet no specific treatment. In fatty acid oxidation disorders, arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy occur during acute decompensation. An important recently established cause of cardiomyopathy is carnitine transporter defect; it is treated effectively with oral carnitine. The autosomal dominant arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia occurs with a prevalence of about 1 in 15,000 and presents with arrythmias and a dilated right ventricle. The mutations responsible have been mapped to chromosomes 1, 2, 10 and 14. Lysosomal storage disorders, the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and other connective-tissue disorders affect cardiac valves and vessels. In addition to the relatively common inherited lipoprotein disorders familial hypercholesterolaemia and familial combined hyperlipidaemia, an important dominantly inherited lipid variable contributing to coronary risk is lipoprotein(a). The gene is localized to chromosome 6 and there is full expression in childhood. Elevated lipoprotein(a) levels contribute to the occurrence and severity of early-onset coronary disease and add to the already enhanced risk in patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia.