BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of Marfan's syndrome in childhood and adolescence is made by the criteria of the Gent nosology, which evaluates genetic data, family history and a spectrum of clinical criteria. Due to the age dependent manifestations of the clinical symptoms, combined with the extreme heterogeneity of Marfan's syndrome diagnosis in early childhood remains sometimes difficult. PATIENTS: Prospectively, we analyzed the clinical symptoms of all patients where Marfan's syndrome was suspected. We evaluated those patients between January 1997 and April 2002 by an interdisciplinary approach. METHODS: We compared the clinical datas of the patients by using the Gent nosology and the Berlin nosolgy. RESULTS: 34 patients underwent full follow-up. The median age was 10,32 years with a range of 0,01 to 37,31 years, 19 patients were male, 15 patients were female. In eight patients Marfan's syndrome could be rouled out, 9 of 26 patients (34,6 %) fullified the criteria of the Gent nosology, in 17 of 26 patients (65,4 %) Marfan's syndrome remained just suspected, but was not fullified by the criteria of the Gent nosology. Concerning the Berlin nosology 14 of 26 patients (53,8 %) fullified the criteria, 12 of 26 patients (46,2 %) failed. Due to the criteria of the Gent nosology 14 patients (53,8 %) fullified the criteria of skeletal involvement, 21 patients (80,8 %) fullified cardiovascular major manifestation, 6 patients (23,1 %) had an ophthalmic major manifestation, and 9 patients (34,6 %) had an affected first degree relative or were genetically determined. CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of the data of our patients the diagnosis of Marfan's syndrome in childhood and adolescence can be made more sensitive by the criteria of the Berlin nosology compared to the Gent nosology. This seems to be caused by the age dependent manifestations of the symptoms. Until diagnostic algorhythms of Marfan's syndrome in childhood remain suboptimal, continuous clinical follow-up for all cases even those only in the case of suspected Marfan's syndrome are necessary to exclude complicated course and to improve outcome.