Snoring and obstructive sleep apnea are a frequent problem not only in adults, but also in children and adolescents, as can be seen from current epidemiological data. The epidemiology, etiology, diagnosis, and management of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) in adults have been adequately established on the basis of evidential data. As a result of this, both physicians and the public are increasingly aware of OSAS in adults. Although there are numerous parallels between pediatric and adult OSAS, the situation in children differs that in adults. There is a greater variety of symptoms in children with OSAS, diagnosis is often more difficult with serious consequences for growth and development of children. Treatment of OSAS in children is also different from that of the adult patient. There are many possible causes for the development of obstructive sleep apnea in children. These include hypertrophy of the tonsils and syndromes such as Down syndrome, Pickwickian syndrome, Prader-Willi syndrome or Marfan syndrome. OSAS can, however, also be the result of obesity, midfacial dysplasia, retro- or micrognathia, allergic rhinitis or muscular dystrophy. Epidemiological data presented in the literature concerning the incidence of OSAS in children is extremely varied. This wide range is probably due to the fact that snoring may be misdiagnosed as OSAS. The diagnosis of OSAS in children may only be made by considering clinical history (such as rate of growth, tendency to fall asleep during the day, sleep disturbances, susceptibility to infection, etc.), polysomnography (if possible during several nights) and accompanying instrumental diagnosis including cephalometry or laryngoscopy. One of the problems of polysomnography in childhood is that performance and interpretation of the results have not yet been standardized or evaluated for different age groups. Treatment depends on the cause of OSAS and require multidisciplinary management involving the pediatrician, pediatric or adolescent psychiatrist, ear, nose, and throat specialist, maxillofacial surgeons, and neurosurgeons. Adenotonsillectomy (ATE) is the therapy generally chosen if the child has adenoidal vegetations and/or tonsillar hypertrophy. Corrective surgery is possible for rare malformation syndromes. Nocturnal masks for continuous positive airway nasal pressure or procedures for mask respiration are effective in children, but are only used in exceptional cases, such as when ATE is contraindicated or when symptoms of OSAS remain after surgery. The success of pharmacological treatment of OSAS in children has not been evaluated in controlled clinical trials.