 OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the operative technique and preliminary results of video-assisted thoracoscopic anterior correction and fusion of scoliosis. METHODS: Eleven cases underwent thoracoscopic anterior correction and fusion of scoliosis from March 2003 to April 2005 in our hospital were reviewed. They were all females with an average age of 13.1 years old. Of which, 9 cases were idiopathic scoliosis, 1 case was congenital scoliosis, and 1 case was Marfan syndrome scoliosis. The coronal Cobb angle and apical vertebral translation before and after surgery as well as at final follow-up were measured. The operation time, blood loss during operation, and peri-operative complications were recorded. Results The mean operation time was 6.4 hours, mean instrumented vertebrae were 6.4 segments, and mean blood loss during operation was 364 mL. The coronal Cobb angles of the thoracic curve before and after surgery were 45.5 degrees and 15.4 degrees respectively, with an average correction rate of 65.4%. The lumbar curve was corrected from 28.4 degrees lation to 11.8 degrees, with an average simultaneous correction rate of 57.2%. All of the patients were followed up regularly with an average time of 21.4 months. At the final follow-up, the coronal Cobb angles of the thoracic and lumbar curves were 19.0 degrees and 20.1 degrees, with a 3.6 degrees and 8.3 degrees loss of correction, respectively. The apical vertebral translation was improved from 32.3 mm to 10.5 mm for the thoracic curve, and from 13.1 mm to 8.2 mm for the lumbar curve. There were 6 cases with peri-operative complications, including 1 case of thoracic effusion, 1 case of chylothorax, 1 case of locking plug loosing, 2 cases of aggravation of the unfused lumbar curve (1 case also with thoracolumbar kyphosis), and 1 case with a screw tip causing a contour deformity of the aorta. And 4 of them underwent revision surgery. CONCLUSIONS: Video-assisted thoracoscopic anterior correction and fusion of scoliosis has good correction capability, less intraoperative bleeding, and favorable cosmetic effect for mild and moderate thoracic scoliosis, but with higher rates of correction loss of the lumbar curve and peri-operative complications. A surgeon should be cautious to perform this technique. ders