 OBJECTIVE: We report our 6-year experience with the visceral hybrid procedure for high-risk patients with thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms (TAAA) and chronic expanding aortic dissections (CEAD). METHODS: Hybrid procedure includes debranching of the visceral and renal arteries followed by endovascular exclusion of the aneurysm. A series of 28 patients (20 male, mean age 66 years) were treated between January 2001 and July 2007. Sixteen patients had TAAAs type I-III, one type IV, four thoracoabdominal placque ruptures, and seven patients CEAD. Patients were treated for asymptomatic, symptomatic, and ruptured aortic pathologies in 20, and 4 patients, respectively. Two patients had Marfan's syndrome; 61% had previous infrarenal aortic surgery. The infrarenal aorta was the distal landing zone in 70%. In elective cases, simultaneous approach (n = 9, group I) and staged approach (n = 11, group II) were performed. Mean follow-up is 22 months (range 0.1-78). RESULTS: Primary technical success was achieved in 89%. All stent grafts were implanted in the entire thoracoabdominal aorta. Additionally, three patients had previous complete arch vessel revascularization. Left subclavian artery was intentionally covered in three patients (11%). Thirty-day mortality rate was 14.3% (4/28). One patient had a rupture before the staged endovascular procedure and died. Overall survival rate at 3 years was 70%, in group I 80%, and in group II 60% (P = .234). Type I endoleak rate was 8%. Permanent paraplegia rate was 11%. Three patients required long-term dialysis (11%). Peripheral graft occlusion rate was 11% at 30 days. Gut infarction with consecutive bowel resection occurred in two patients. There was no significant difference between group I and II regarding paraplegia and complications. CONCLUSIONS: Early results of visceral hybrid repair for high-risk patients with complex and extended TAAAs and CEADs are encouraging in a selected group of high risk patients in whom open repair is hazardous and branched endografts are not yet optional.