BACKGROUND: We report the results of the secondary implantation of retroiridally fixated irisclaw-lenses (Artisan(R)) to correct aphakia. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study included all eyes that had undergone outpatient implantation of an Artisan IOL by the senior author (MK) between July 2004 and January 2008. We analysed 48 eyes of 46 patients (27 female, 19 male) aged 17 to 87 years. Underlying conditions were: aphakia after congenital cataract or trauma (19 eyes), late luxation of a posterior chamber IOL (16 eyes), intraoperative zonulolysis during cataract surgery that did not allow PC IOL implantation (12 eyes, including 10 eyes with pseudoexfoliation and one eye with Marfan syndrome), anterior chamber IOL with corneal decompensation problems and recurrent hyphema (1 eye). Simultaneous surgical procedures included: anterior vitrectomy (48 eyes), pars plana vitrectomy (14 eyes), removal of PC IOL (16 eyes), removal of AC IOL (1 eye), and penetrating keratoplasty (1 eye). Mean follow-up was 14.3 months (range: 1 - 31 months). IOL power was calculated using the SRKT formula and an A constant of 116.7. RESULTS: Surgery was uneventful in all cases with safe enclavation of both IOL haptics. Mean postoperative refraction was 0 dpt. (range: -0.75 to + 1.0 dpt.), median postoperative visual acuity in Log-Mar was 0.2; compared to preoperative visual acuity (median 0.4 Log-Mar); all patients improved. Pre- and postoperative intraocular pressures were in the normal range in all eyes. Complications were few: one eye without patent iridotomy developed pupillary block glaucoma one day following surgery and was successfully treated by Nd:YAG iridotomy. One patient following blunt ocular trauma developed a retinal detachment with PVR 10 months following implantation of the Artisan IOL that was repaired uneventfully by pars plana vitrectomy with silicone oil instillation. In this case, the Artisan IOL was left in place. In two eyes, secondary trauma resulted in dislocation of one haptic of the Artisan IOL. In both of these cases, refixation of the Artisan IOL was easily performed by enclavation of the iris claw. In two patients cystoid macula oedema was observed. CONCLUSIONS: With correct indications the implantation of a retroiridally fixated IOL (Artisan) is a safe and predictable method to correct aphakia and has become our method of choice instead of anterior chamber IOLs and sclera fixated IOLs.