 UNLABELLED: The aim of the study was to evaluate the long-term survival in patients undergoing surgical treatment for chronic aortic aneurysms with aortic regurgitation. MATERIAL AND METHODS: We analyzed survival data of 188 patients during follow-up period of 1 month to 20 years postoperatively. The patients were divided into the following groups according to the clinical course: Group 1--chronic dissecting aneurysm of ascending aorta with aortic regurgitation (42 patients, 22.3%); Group 2--chronic nondissecting aneurysm of ascending aorta with aortic regurgitation (146 patients, 77.7%). Mean NYHA functional class of the patients was 3.5+/-0.06. In the Group 1, 64.3% of the patients were in NYHA functional class IV; 35.7% of the patients were in NYHA class III. In the Group 2, the majority of the patients (58.2%) were in class III; in class IV - 41.8%. The most common etiological factors in both groups were atherosclerosis, arterial hypertension, and Marfan's syndrome. RESULTS: No differences in overall and long-term survival rates between the groups were found. However, the patients who were in class III before the operation showed significantly higher overall and long-term survival rates in comparison with the survival rate of the patients who were in NYHA class IV preoperatively (overall survival rate, 91.4+/-3.0% vs 62.9+/-6.9%; and long-term survival rate, 93.2+/-2.7% vs 72.9+/-5.6; respectively). There were 24 deaths (12.8%) during the late postoperative period. The main causes of death were progressive heart failure and infective prosthetic endocarditis (Group 2), chronic heart failure and dysfunction of the conduit (Group 1). CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of patients' long-term survival demonstrated the efficacy of surgical treatment of such a complex pathology as chronic aneurysm of the ascending aorta with aortic valve regurgitation. The survival rate in the late postoperative period was higher in NYHA class III patients. The main causes of death were chronic heart failure and infective prosthetic endocarditis.