 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is characterized by vascular findings (cerebral, thoracic, and abdominal arterial aneurysms and/or dissections) and skeletal manifestations (pectus excavatum or pectus carinatum, scoliosis, joint laxity, arachnodactyly, talipes equinovarus). Approximately 75% of affected individuals have LDS type I with craniofacial manifestations (ocular hypertelorism, bifid uvula/cleft palate, craniosynostosis); approximately 25% have LDS type II with cutaneous manifestations (velvety and translucent skin; easy bruising; widened, atrophic scars). LDSI and LDSII form a clinical continuum. The natural history of LDS is characterized by aggressive arterial aneurysms (mean age at death 26.1 years) and high incidence of pregnancy-related complications including death and uterine rupture.  DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of LDS is based on characteristic clinical findings in the proband and family members and molecular genetic testing of TGFBR1 and TGFBR2, the only two genes known to be associated with LDS. Such testing is available on a clinical basis. No differences in phenotype are observed between individuals with mutations in TGFBR1 and TGFBR2.  MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Important considerations when managing cardiovascular features of LDS: aortic dissection occurs at smaller aortic diameters than observed in Marfan syndrome; vascular disease is not limited to the aortic root; beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications are used to reduce hemodynamic stress; and aneurysms are amenable to early and aggressive surgical intervention. Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability may be necessary to prevent spinal cord damage. Standard treatment of club feet and severe pes planus. Standard treatment of cleft palate and craniosynostosis; management by a craniofacial team is preferred.  Prevention of secondary complications: Consider subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis in those undergoing dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria. Surveillance: All individuals with LDS require echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta; the frequency of magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) or computerized tomography angiography (CTA) evaluation depends on clinical findings. Individuals with cervical spine instability and severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist.  Agents/circumstances to avoid: contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise; agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants; activities that cause joint injury or pain.  Testing of relatives at risk: If the causal TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 mutation is known in the proband, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify genetic status of family members at risk; if the mutation is not known, relatives at risk should be evaluated for signs of LDS, including echocardiography and extensive vascular imaging if findings suggest LDS or if findings were subtle in the index case. GENETIC COUNSELING: LDS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Approximately 25% of individuals diagnosed with LDS have an affected parent; approximately 75% of probands have LDS as the result of a de novo gene mutation. Each child of an individual with LDS has a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation and the disorder. Prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk for LDS is possible if the disease-causing mutation in the family is known.