 OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical effects and safety of the auxiliary management with iris retractor for subluxated lens combined with cataract. METHODS: Thirty-one eyes lens subluxation with cataract come from 27 patients were reviewed, all of them were 30 - 78 years old and III - IV grade of nuclear. Among these patients, 14 were traumatic cataracts, 12 Marfan syndromes, two over-mature phase of cataracts, one caused suspensory ligament broken during phacoemulsification, and one unclear reason. 1 to 4 iris retractors were used during surgeries, according to the extension of zonular loss and nuclear hardness. Anterior vitrectomy would be taken if vitreous prolapsed. Visual acuities and reactions post-operative were observed, too. And correlation analysis would be used to study the relationship of those objections. RESULTS: There were no serious complications during the surgeries such as tearing of capsular, falling of nuclear, bleeding of intraocular, and so on. Only 9 of 31 eyes (29.0%) had vitreous prolapsed interoperation, which appeared a significant correlated with range of zonular loss (Spearman r = 0.453, P = 0.010). However, none of them happened during the phacoemulsification for lens nucleus and only 6 eyes took the anterior vitrectomy. The best corrected postoperative visual acuity of these patients attended to 0.2 - 1.2 at a half to 1 month, increased by 1 - 12 lines [average of (6.0 ± 2.7) lines] compared with preoperative. Twenty-three eyes visual acuity of them were no less than 0.5. Corneal edema postoperatively appeared a significant correlated with vitrectomy (Spearman r = 0.398, P = 0.026), while seemed no associated with the range of zonular loss, the number of iris retractors, energy and duration of ultrasound burst or type of intraocular lens (IOL) (P > 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Phacoemulsification assists with iris retractor can simplify the process of cataract surgery of subluxated lens. Individualized surgical planning and flexible and decisive measures intra-operative achieved good results and well safety in these dangerous and complex lens diseases.