The purpose of this study of 6 cases of Marfan's or Marfan-like syndrome detected in 7077 echocardiographic examinations was to investigate the clinical value of echocardiography. The mean age of the patients was 40 years, and 4 of them (66 p. 100) were female. The diagnosis was based on the 4 criteria of Marfan's syndrome in 1 case, on 3 criteria in 2 cases and on 2 criteria in 3 cases. Four patients were known to have a previous cardiac murmur. Auscultation revealed a systolic murmur of mitral regurgitation in 3 cases (associated with a diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation in 2 of them), a diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation in 3 cases and a systolic murmur due to calcified bicuspid aortic valve in 1 case. ECG recorded a normal rhythm in 4 cases, atrial fibrillation in 2 cases of mitral regurgitation, and left ventricular hypertrophy in 3 cases. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly in 3 patients and severe kyphoscoliosis in one. Echocardiography visualized dilatation of the ascending aorta, severe (60 mm) in 1 case, in 3 patients; dilatation of the pulmonary artery in 1 patient; pansystolic mitral valve prolapse in 3 patients (associated with aortic and tricuspid valve prolapse in 2 of them after the disease had progressed); isolated aortic valve prolapse due to bicuspid valve in 2 patients; intracardiac calcifications in 3 patients; subaortic septal hypertrophy in 1 patient and calcified incompetent foramen ovale in 1 patient. Aortography performed in 3 patients disclosed an aneurysm of Valsalva's sinuses in 1 case and a mild aortic insufficiency in 2 cases. Two patients underwent cardiac catheterization for severe mitral regurgitation due to mitral valve prolapse requiring valve replacement, which was successfully done. Thus, echocardiography may provide an early diagnosis of Marfan's syndrome, since cardiovascular abnormalities are frequent in infancy. It also ensures a close follow-up of the disorders and it is useful in deciding whether treatment should be medical or surgical. It may detect formes frustes in a family with Marfan's syndrome, and it may define a borderline group of patients: those with Marfan-like syndrome. In these patients the cardiovascular lesions are more preponderant and appear later than in the classical Marfan's syndrome; they are often difficult to differentiate from the lesions of Barlow's syndrome.