PURPOSE: To review the available information on the diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic aspects of cardiac complications in women with the Marfan syndrome during the peripartum period and to develop guidelines for the approach to these patients on the basis of this information. DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE search and a manual search of bibliographies from reviewed articles. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Articles that reported on pregnancy in patients with the Marfan syndrome or that discussed potentially relevant aspects of the syndrome. RESULTS: Pregnancy in the Marfan syndrome is associated with two primary problems: potential catastrophic aortic dissection and the risk for having a child with the syndrome. The risk for peripartum aortic dissection is especially high in women in whom aortic root dilatation is diagnosed before pregnancy. Gestation seems to be safer in women without preexisting cardiovascular disease; however, an event-free pregnancy cannot be guaranteed. The Marfan syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, and the fetus has a 50% risk for inheriting the mutant gene. CONCLUSIONS: Women with the syndrome should be counseled before conception about the risks of pregnancy to both mother and fetus. Because preconceptual dilatation of the ascending aorta seems to be an important predictor for aortic dissection, it should be excluded before pregnancy. Transesophageal echocardiography seems to be preferable for noninvasive assessment of aortic dilatation before and during pregnancy. Prophylactic use of beta-blockers may be useful in preventing aortic dilatation. Surgery should be considered during gestation in patients with progressive aortic dilatation when or before the aortic root reaches 5.5 cm. Because of the potential risk of ionizing radiation to the fetus, noninvasive methods such as transesophageal echocardiography and magnetic resonance imaging are preferred to contrast aortography for the diagnosis of aortic dissection during pregnancy. Vaginal delivery can be done in patients with the Marfan syndrome who do not have cardiovascular system abnormalities. In patients with aortic dilatation, aortic dissection, or other important cardiac abnormalities, cesarean section should be the preferred method of delivery.