Arterial involvement is an important feature of the diagnosis and, above all, prognosis of heritable disorders of connective tissue. In pseudoxanthoma elasticum, a progressive occlusive syndrome is associated with hemorrhage and especially with gastrointestinal bleeding. Aneurysms are uncommon. Hypertension occurs frequently. Cutaneous signs (yellowish pseudo xanthomatous papules of the large folds) the ocular changes (angioid streaks) and pathology showing numerous, thickened, fragmented, disorganized, calcified elastic fibers in the deep dermis and arterial walls, allow the diagnosis to be made. In the heterogeneous group of Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, type IV is characterized by sudden spontaneous rupture of the large arteries. Aneurysms and carotido-cavernous fistulae are rather frequent. Owing to friability of the arterial walls, arteriograms and other procedure requiring arterial puncture may prove hazardous and surgery difficult. Such patients have an acrogeric morphotype, and thin, fragile skin, but cutaneous hyperelasticity and joint hyperlaxity are usually minimal. Pathology evidences collagen hypoplasia in the skin and arterial walls. The severity of Marfan syndrome is due to aortic involvement. A fusiform aneurysm of the ascending aorta represents a vital risk of rupture. Aortic root dilatation is associated and responsible of severe aortic regurgitation. Aortic dissection is also a serious threat. Improved surgical techniques for repairing a dilated or dissected aortic root with simultaneous replacement of the aortic valve increases the life expectancy of such patients. Dolichomorphism is the characteristic skeletal abnormality, particularly with arachnodactyly and upward ectopia lentis, which is almost bilateral, is a very frequent feature of Marfan syndrome. The most typical histological finding is aortic cystic median necrosis. The basic defect in Marfan syndrome concerns the fibrillin, whose gene is located on chromosome 15. The three diseases detailed in this paper constitute the main areas of this subject, but arterial involvement may occur in other inheritable disorders of connective tissue (osteogenesis imperfecta, cutis laxa, Werner syndrome, Menkes syndrome, etc).