BACKGROUND: This study was done to answer the question, "What is the current risk of resection of ascending aortic aneurysms regardless of acuity or cause?" METHODS: One hundred fifteen consecutive patients who underwent ascending aortic aneurysm repair from January 1, 1990, to July 1, 1995, were retrospectively reviewed, excluding those with acute ascending aortic dissection. The mean age was 59 years; 55% were male. Concomitant procedures included coronary artery bypass in 23 (20%) and arch repair in 12 (10%). In group 1, 54 patients had replacement of the aortic valve, root, and ascending aorta with a valve-graft conduit using the "Bentall" technique, and of these 19 (35%) had Marfan's syndrome. In group II, 44 patients had separate aortic valve repair or replacement and supracoronary ascending aortic replacement. In group III, 17 patients had supracoronary ascending aortic replacement, without aortic valve operation. Operative techniques included frequent use of (1) intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography or epiaortic ultrasound scanning of the ascending and descending thoracic aorta to help guide arterial cannulation, avoid atherosclerotic embolization, and assess the repair; (2) antegrade and retrograde multidose cold blood cardioplegia for myocardial protection; (3) exclusion and button anastomotic techniques to ensure secure suture lines; (4) antifibrinolytic agents and collagen-impregnated aortic grafts to reduce bleeding; and (5) deep hypothermic circulatory arrest and the open distal anastomotic technique in patients with distal ascending and arch aortic disease. RESULTS: Operative mortality overall was 2/115 (1.7%). Mortality was 1/54 (1.8) in group I and 1/44 (2%) in group II, and there was no mortality in group III. The overall postoperative morbidity was 3% due to bleeding, 2% due to stroke, and 1% due to myocardial infarction. The length of stay in the past year has decreased to less than 7 days. CONCLUSIONS: The current risk for ascending aortic aneurysm repair is low (< 2%) whether or not the aortic root or valve also needs repair, regardless of the cause of the aneurysm.