BACKGROUND: Liver transplantation (LT) remains a high-risk operation, especially during the first months after LT when technical complications and preexisting illness exert their influence on survival. However, there are late deaths. The authors have reviewed their experience to identify factors impacting on long-term survival. METHODS: A total of 150 patients who had undergone liver transplantation over an 11-year period were reviewed. Thirty-three patients died after LT (22%). Of these, 18 of 33 (55%) died in the first 3 postoperative months. One hundred thirty-two patients survived beyond 3 months, and 15 patients (11%) suffered late deaths. This review concentrates on the latter group. RESULTS: The primary cause of death was sepsis in 11 of 15 (73%). In two, sepsis complicated retransplantation in chronically debilitated patients. Two additional patients had late-presenting postoperative complications (bile leak or abscess, intestinal obstruction with perforation). In two cases, pneumocystis carinii pneumonia occurred; noncompliance or unplanned discontinuation of prophylaxis was directly responsible. Multiple organ system failure from presumed immunoincompetence developed in four patients; one had undergone bone marrow transplantation for aplastic anemia (AA) after fulminant hepatic failure (FHF). Lymphoproliferative disease (LPD) was the cause of death in 3 of 15 cases (20%). In only three cases was the cause of death related to the patient's primary disease (chronic hepatitis, Alper's syndrome or seizures, and AA with FHF). Pretransplant diagnosis, and UNOS status at the time of LT did not influence the long-term survival. CONCLUSIONS: Long-term survival in patients who have undergone LT was compromised by immunosuppressive complications and sepsis. Early mortality factors, such as UNOS status, age at LT, primary diagnosis, and technical complications do not predict late deaths. In children who adhere to their medical regimen and have good initial allograft function, late postoperative infection, especially with Ebstein-Barr virus, accounts for most of the late mortality. Improved and decreased immunosuppression may further improve these long-term results.