Rh immune globulin (RhIG) has been used to prevent alloimmunization in D(-) recipients of apheresis platelet transfusions from D(+) donors that may contain up to 5 mL of D(+) red blood cells (RBCs). Granulocyte concentrates contain approximately 30 mL of RBCs and it has been necessary to give D(-) recipients granulocyte transfusions from D(+) donors. Intravenous RhIG has not yet been demonstrated to be effective in preventing D alloimmunization with granulocyte transfusions. Four D(-) recipients received multiple D(+) granulocyte transfusions from D(+) donors and multiple injections of intravenous RhIG at a standard dose of 600 microg for each D(+) transfusion. Two D(-) males with chronic granulomatous disease were given 32 and 13 daily granulocyte transfusions, 18 and 2 of which, respectively, were D(+). After the first dose of intravenous RhIG, both patients exhibited circulating anti-D that was undetectable 3 to 4 years later. Two patients with severe aplastic anemia were given 5 and 14 granulocyte transfusions, 4 and 7 of which, respectively, were D(+). Both patients died before the effectiveness of RhIG could be assessed. In one of these patients the indirect and direct antiglobulin tests became positive after the first dose of intravenous RhIG, which required that subsequent granulocyte transfusions from D(+) donors be crossmatched by immediate spin (IS) testing only. A delayed hemolytic reaction attributed to allo-anti-K occurred after granulocytes from a K(+) donor were given to this patient. These results suggest that intravenous RhIG can be used to prevent alloimmunization to D in D(-) patients receiving large quantities of RBCs from D(+) granulocyte transfusions. However, anti-D and other passive antibodies from RhIG prohibit the use of the antiglobulin crossmatch with antigen-positive granulocyte donor samples. It may be important to frequently collect new samples to screen for newly formed allo-antibodies when IS crossmatches are used in place of the antiglobulin crossmatch.