 OBJECTIVE: To investigate the diagnosis, management, pregnancy outcome and prognosis of bicytopenia or pancytopenia during pregnancy. METHODS: Retrospective chart review was conducted on 24 pregnancies who were found bicytopenia or pancytopenia during pregnancy for the first time. The diagnoses were reconfirmed. The management and pregnancy outcome were collected. And the prognoses were followed. RESULTS: According to the clinical data and laboratory findings, the latter including complete blood cell count, reticulocyte count, peripheral smear, serum folate and vitamin B12 level, autoimmune antibody screening, bone marrow smear and biopsy, thirteen patients were diagnosed as having chronic aplastic anemia (CAA), six as having myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), two as having megaloblastic anemia (MA), one as having paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH), one as having Evan's syndrome and one as having acute leukemia. The management basically consisted of supportive transfusions. Six patients suffered pregnancy complications including four with severe preeclampsia (one with intracranial hemorrhage and one with intrauterine death concomitantly) and two with gestational diabetes. The delivery ages of the 21 patients were term or nearly term with all good neonatal outcomes. Postpartum follow-up showed the two patients with MA achieved complete remission, the one with PNH had mild anemia and that with Evan's syndrome had mild thrombocytopenia. The patient with acute leukemia died of recurrence six months postpartum. Of the thirteen patients with CAA, two achieved complete remission, six partial remission, four no remission and one was lost follow-up. Of the 6 patients with MDS, one achieved partial remission, four no remission, and one transformed into acute monocytic leukemia, then refused chemotherapy and was lost follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: CAA may be one of the most common causes of bicytopenia or pancytopenia during pregnancy, MDS may be the second. Diagnosis should be made as soon as possible through appropriate and reasonable laboratory examinations. Most patients could achieve good pregnancy outcomes through supportive management. The maternal prognosis may vary widely depending on the causes.