 BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Neutropenic enterocolitis (NE) is clinically defined by the triad of neutropenia, abdominal pain and fever. This retrospective study is to review 24 cases of NE in a single Chinese tertiary center, to elucidate clinical feature, treatments and outcome for this dangerous gastrointestinal complication of neutropenia. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The medical records of pediatric patients who were diagnosed with neutropenic enterocolitis from 2000 to 2009 were reviewed. RESULTS: Of 24 cases, the ratio of male to female was 2:1, the mean age was 7.2 years. There were eight cases of acute lymphocytic leukemia, eight cases of acute non-lymphocytic leukemia, four cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, one case of severe aplastic anemia, one case of neuroblastoma and two cases of simple neutropenia without underlying cause. The hematologic malignancy was significantly associated with the occurrence of NE (OR = 19.4). Seventeen cases developed NE during anticancer chemotherapy (chemo group), four cases presented with leukemia and one case presented with aplastic anemia before the initiation of chemotherapy and their presenting event leading to diagnosis. Two cases simply presented with NE without definitive reasons (no chemo group). All the patients had the typical clinical presentation, six cases had disseminated peritonitis, toxic shock, and assisted ventilations were necessary in three of these six cases. CT or ultrasound demonstrated bowel wall thickness, paucity of air in the cecum and/or right colon, pneumatosis or pneumoperitoneum. There was no difference in the nadir neutrophil count in patients, who received chemotherapy versus those who did not (P = 0.001), but the recovering time from NE in chemo group (9.3 ± 1.9) was shorter than non-chemo group (10.7 ± 5.3, P = 0.034). Sixteen (88.8%) cases have been successfully managed medically, using aggressive hemodynamic support, bowel rest, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy with surgical intervention reversed only for the more severe six cases (25%). Two cases died. CONCLUSION: NE is a life-threatening gastrointestinal complication of neutropenia. Physicians might remain vigilant and consider NE in any neutropenic patient rather than only in oncologic patients. It has typical clinical presentation and CT can provide clear delineation for diagnosis. Early recognition and progressed management have reduced mortality. Most children with NE may be treated without surgery with favorable outcome.