 OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical features, outcomes and treatments of viral hepatitis combined with aplastic anemia. METHODS: 25 cases diagnosed as viral hepatits combined with aplastic anemia in Beijing Ditan Hsopital between April 2004 and September 2009 were retrospectively analyzed. In this group of patients aplastic anemia was finally diagnosed by bone marrow aspiration. We collected clinical data of these patients, including a history of liver disease, drug allergies, hospital medication history, laboratory data, and then performed descriptive analysis. RESULTS: 25 patients with viral hepatitis were diagnosed as complicated with aplastic anemia by histopathological data. Among these patients, 17 were male and 8 were women. Viral hepatitis included: chronic hepatitis B (12 cases), chronic hepatitis C (4 cases), acute hepatits E (1 case), hepatitis caused by CMV infection (1 case), and unclassified hepatitis (7 cases). Among these patients, 7 were diagnosed as severe hepatits. Considering previous history, only 3 patients had history of short term interferon therapy before hospitalization, and the remaining patients did not use drug that affects blood system. Treatments were as followings: using colony stimulating factor in 6 patients, gamma globulin in 9 patients, glucocorticoids in 3 patients, erythropoietin in 1 patient, only oral drug to raise erythrocytes in 2 patients, red blood cells transfusion in 6 patients, platelets transfusion in 2 patients. As for clinical outcomes, 20 patients acquired improved condition and were dicharged, 3 patients were discharged voluntarily and 2 patients died of severe hepatits combined with other complications. CONCLUSION: Main treatments of viral hepatitis combined with aplastic anemia were to treat primary hepatopathy and nucleoside analogue-based antiviral therapy, to provide symptomatic and supportive treatment for blood diseases. Blood diseases would recover simultaneously while liver disease was improved, and the prognosis was good.