 UNLABELLED: BACKGROUND Very severe aplastic anemia is characterized by a hypoplastic bone marrow due to destruction of CD34(+) stem cells by autoreactive T cells. Investigation of the pathomechanism by patient-specific gene expression analysis of the attacked stem cells has previously been impractical because of the scarcity of these cells at diagnosis. DESIGN AND METHODS: Employing unbiased RNA amplification, patient-specific gene expression profiling was carried out for CD34(+) cells from patients newly diagnosed with very severe aplastic anemia (n=13), refractory anemia (n=8) and healthy controls (n=10). These data were compared to profiles of myelodysplastic disease (n=55), including refractory anemia (n=18). To identify possible targets of autoimmune attack, presence of autoreactive antibodies was tested in pre-therapeutic sera of patients with very severe aplastic anemia (n=19). RESULTS: CD34(+) gene expression profiling distinguished between healthy controls, children with aplastic or refractory anemia and clonal disease. Interferon stimulated genes such as the apoptosis inducing death ligand TRAIL were strongly up-regulated in CD34(+) cells of patients with aplastic anemia, in particular in patients responding to immunosuppressive treatment. In contrast, mRNA expression of integrin GPVI and the integrin complexes GPIa/IIa, GPIIb/IIIa, GPIB/GPIX/GPV was significantly down-regulated and corresponding antibodies were detected in 7 of 11 profiled patients and in 11 of 19 aplastic anemia patients. CONCLUSIONS As a potential diagnostic tool, patient-specific gene expression profiling of CD34(+) stem cells made it possible to make the difficult differential diagnosis of most patients with aplastic and refractory anemia. Profiling indicated a prognostic correlation of TRAIL expression and patient benefit from immunosuppressive therapy. Downregulation of integrin expression and concurrent presence of autoreactive anti-integrin-antibodies suggested a previously unrecognized pathological role of integrins in aplastic anemia.