In order to explore the diagnosis and therapy of Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA), the clinical data of 45 cases of DBA admitted in our hospital from February 1994 to July 2011 were analyzed retrospectively. The clinical characteristics, results of laboratory examination, treatment reaction and outcome of disease were investigated. The results indicated that out of 45 children diagnosed as DBA, 14 cases (31.1%) had short stature and physical malformation. All patients had anemia with reticulocytopenia. Thirty-four patients (75.6%) had mean corpuscular volume. Eleven patients (24.4%) had macrocytic anemia. Bone marrow examination showed a marked erythroid hypoplasia in all patients. Out of 29 cases tested for fetal hemoglobin (HbF), 13 cases (44.8%) had high level of HbF. Erythroid colony-forming unit of bone marrow was tested in 25 patients, among them 12 patients (48%) showed normal plasia, 13 (52%) showed hypoplasia. The erythropoietin (EPO) levels of 17 patients were elevated. Karyotypes were examined in 28 patients, and showed all normal. The treatment was based on corticosteroids and Cyclosporine A. Thirty patients had good response to corticosteroid therapy, and 10 of them obtained a sustained corticosteroid-induced remission. Twenty cases discontinued corticosteroid therapy after remission, as a result, 15 cases (75%) relapsed, moreover all the relapsed cases still had good response to corticosteroid. Two relapsed patients suffered from aplastic anemia, one of them died of therapy failure. Six patients were unresponsive to corticosteroid, 1 of which achieved remission with cyclosporine A and the others continued to receive regular transfusions. 3 patients received iron chelation therapy. It is concluded that the clinical characteristics, complete blood count, bone marrow smear, HbF level and EPO level are useful to make a diagnosis of DBA. Most patients have a good response to corticosteroid therapy, but relapse rate is high when drug was discontinued. Patients unresponsive to corticosteroid should receive regular transfusions and chelation therapy.