Aplastic anemia serum (AAS) contains humoral factors that alter both proliferation and maturation of human megakaryocytes (MK). The ability of AAS to augment MK colony formation (colony-forming unit, CFU-MK) was neutralized by an antiserum against MK colony-stimulating factor (MK-CSF), a glycoprotein isolated from AAS. The adsorbed AAS still retained the ability to accelerate cytoplasmic maturation of recognizable MK. Similar experiments were done with thrombocytopoiesis-stimulating factor (TSF) and an anti-TSF antiserum to further define the activity in AAS responsible for accelerating cytoplasmic maturation. Bone marrow fractions enriched for recognizable human MK, but devoid of CFU-MK, were obtained by centrifugal elutriation and placed in short-term liquid cultures. MK progressed through identifiable maturation stages (1-4) more quickly in the presence of either TSF or AAS. TSF slightly enhanced the cloning efficiencies of CFU-MK, but did not alter the number of MK in individual colonies derived from non-adherent, low-density, T-cell-depleted bone marrow. In contrast, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin 3 (IL-3), and crude AAS substantially augmented both MK colony formation and cells per colony. TSF also doubled the percent 35S incorporation into platelets of immunothrombocythemic mice, but stimulation was completely abolished by anti-TSF. Anti-TSF antiserum was then used to analyze the promotion of MK colony formation by cytokines. Cloning efficiencies of CFU-MK were reduced to baseline values when TSF was pretreated with anti-TSF; however, the MK colony-stimulating activity (MK-CSA) of GM-CSF, IL-3, or AAS was not altered by adsorption with anti-TSF. In contrast, the cytoplasmic maturation of recognizable MK was slower, and fewer mature stage-4 cells were present at days 1-3 in AAS adsorbed with anti-TSF than MK cultured in AAS treated with normal rabbit serum or untreated AAS. Therefore, TSF appears to be a major factor in AAS that accelerates terminal maturation of human MK. TSF primarily affects megakaryocytopoiesis by promoting MK maturation rather than enhancing CFU-MK proliferation.