In a review of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) for leukemia the following points proved to be of crucial importance: (1) combination of cyclophosphamide (Cy) and total body irradiation (TBI) for conditioning, (2) early BMT for acute leukemia (AL) in first remission and for chronic granulocytic leukemia (CGL) in chronic phase, (3) prophylaxis of graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) with cyclosporin-A (CyA). 50 successive BMT for leukemia performed in Basel between July 1979 and September 1982 are analyzed. 7 of 13 acute myelogenous leukemias (AML) and 8 of 9 acute lymphatic leukemias (ALL) grafted in first remission, and 7 of 10 CGL, are alive without signs of leukemia and without chronic problems. Of the patients grafted for AL in second remission or later, 3 of 6 AML and 6 of 12 ALL are alive. Severe GvHD was seen in 5 of 43 BMT between HLD identical siblings, in three of them combined with interstitial pneumonia. Thus the incidence of these two serious complications of allogeneic BMT has been drastically reduced with CyA compared to our previous experience with prophylactic methotrexate (MTX). 4 grafts were performed between HLA-haploidentical siblings. 3 of the 4 patients developed fatal GvHD. This implies that in this histocompatibility setting CyA alone is not sufficient. No problems were encountered in 3 syngeneic BMT. 12 leukemic relapses were observed. Relapse never occurred in ALL in first remission and never in CGL. 4 recurrences were seen in AML in first remission. All other relapses were in patients with AL grafted in stages other than first remission. In 86 successive patients with severe aplastic anemia (SAA) the following important advances were made: (1) it was shown that the majority of patients have sufficient hemopoietic stem cells and that after treatment with antilymphocyte globulin (ALG) over 70% have long-lasting remissions, (2) the combined treatment with ALG and high dose prednisone increases the remission rates to 90% and in addition shortens the supportive care period significantly. These developments are of crucial importance for patients without an HLA-identical sibling, (3) success rates of marrow transplants between HLA-identical siblings could be increased from 36% with prophylactic MTX to 67% using CyA.