OBJECTIVES: Immune suppression (IS) therapy has provided another opportunity of cure or improvement in the aplastic anemia patients who cannot receive bone marrow transplantation due to many causes. There are a few reports regarding the factors that affect response, survival and prognosis after IS therapy, including antilymphocyte globulin (ALG) in aplastic anemia. Therefore, we analysed our experience to determine the prognostic factors. METHODS: Statistically analysed were 172 patients, from April 1982 to July 1992, who were diagnosed as severe aplastic anemia and treated with IS therapy, including ALG, at Catholic University Medical College, St. Mary's Hospital. RESULTS: Among 172 severe aplastic anemia (SAA) patients who entered the study from April 1982 to July 1992, 144 patients were analysed for response and 122 patient for survival. 58.4% (84/144) responded after the first course of IS therapy. Among those who did not respond on the first course an additional 44% (11/25) responded after the second course of IS therapy. Prognostic factors that might affect the response to the treatment and survival were analysed. In a univariate analysis of patients with no previous history of treatment before is therapy, and a shorter interval between diagnosis and treatment, higher hemoglobin levels before IS therapy, and higher granulocyte counts and combined use use of cyclosporin A(CSA) were positively associated with response (p < 0.05). The combined use of CSA during IS therapy, younger age, lower monthly requirement of platelets transfusion before IS therapy, higher leukocyte counts, higher percent of polymorphonuclear leukocytes, lower percent of lymphocyte, higher bone marrow cellularity and response were positively associated with survival (p < 0.05). In a multivariate analysis, shorter interval between diagnosis and treatment, no combined use of hemopoietic stimulants, such as androgen, and lesser total amount of transfusion were positively associated with Response (p < 0.05). Higher leukocyte counts before IS therapy and the combined use of CSA during IS therapy were significantly associated with longer survival (p < 0.05). Patients with complete or partial response had excellent prognosis (96.7%-100% of 5 year survival rates). In contrast, patients with no response after IS therapy had 45.1% of 5 year survival rates. CONCLUSIONS: With these results from the retrospective study of IS therapy, we find many valuable factors that have an influence on response or survival. IS therapy improves the survival of responded patients with SAA, and we confirmed that IS therapy is an important therapeutic tool for the SAA patients who are not feasible candidates for bone marrow transplantation.