PURPOSE: Eighteen cases of pyogenic liver abscess (PLA) admitted at JIPMER hospital, South India, over a 6-year period were analyzed to document the clinical profile and to evaluate the management of PLA among children. METHODS: Records of all these patients were reviewed for presenting signs and symptoms, any associated condition, investigative results, management, and follow-up findings. RESULTS: The overall incidence of PLA was 78.9 per 100,000 pediatric (under 12 years) admissions. One patient had aplastic anemia and was on long-term steroid therapy, whereas another had measles in recent past. Moderate to severe malnutrition was present in five (27.8%) and ascariasis in seven (38.9%) children. Common presentations were fever (100%), abdominal pain (76.9%), and tender hepatomegaly (83.3%). Ultrasonography results were positive in all cases. Fourteen patients (77.8%) had solitary liver abscess, and four had multiple abscesses. Organism was isolated in 11 cases (63.6%), and Staphylococcus aureus was the commonest isolate (66.7%). All patients received antibiotics. Twelve cases were managed conservatively with antibiotics alone, of these only two (16.7%) required drainage later on. Percutaneous aspiration was also undertaken in four additional (22.2%) cases and open drainage in two (11.1%), at presentation. The overall mortality rate was 11.1%. Time taken for complete resolution ranged from 10 days to 40 days. CONCLUSIONS: Any child presenting with fever, abdominal pain, and tender hepatomegaly should be subjected to ultrasound scan for early detection of PLA. S aureus is the commonest causative agent. Enterobacteriaceae contribute significantly during infancy. A combination of cloxacillin and gentamicin or a third generation cephalosporine and gentamicin, especially in infants, is a satisfactory initial coverage. Therapeutic drainage is not a must in all cases of PLA. When required, percutaneous needle aspiration is safe and effective. Resolution and significant reduction in mortality has been made possible by early detection and optimum antibiotics therapy.