By using Dexter-type long-term marrow cultures (D-LTMC), it has been shown previously that hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) from patients with aplastic anemia (AA) have a deficient proliferation in vitro. The studies reported to date, however, have focused exclusively on granulomonocytic progenitors and no information exists on erythroid or multipotent progenitor cells. On the other hand, in such studies, the input progenitor cell numbers were significantly below normal levels, thus suggesting that the rapid disappearance of myeloid progenitor cells from AA D-LTMC could also be due, at least in part, to their reduced number at culture onset. In the present study, we have followed the kinetics of myeloid, erythroid, and multipotent progenitors, from 24 AA patients subjected to immunosuppressive therapy (including patients that achieved complete, partial, or no remission at all), throughout a seven-week culture period. For analysis, we grouped all the patients based on their initial content of all three types of progenitors. Thus, we were able to evaluate separately the kinetics of these cells in D-LTMC from patients with normal and subnormal levels of progenitor cells. At the time of marrow sampling, most patients showed decreased levels of HPC; in fact, only 21%, 8%, and 16% of them showed normal levels of myeloid, erythroid, and multipotent progenitors, respectively. When cultured in D-LTMC, HPC from all AA patients analyzed showed a relatively fast disappearance from the cultures. Indeed, myeloid progenitors could be detected for only six weeks, whereas erythroid and multipotent progenitors disappeared from the cultures after two and one weeks of culture, respectively. In contrast, in normal marrow D-LTMC, myeloid, erythroid, and multipotent progenitors were detected for at least seven, five, and three weeks, respectively. Such a deficient proliferation was observed even in cultures of AA patients that contained normal levels of HPC at culture onset. Interestingly, no correlation was found between HPC proliferation in D-LTMC and response to treatment. Thus, the results of this study indicate the presence of a functional in vitro deficiency in the hematopoietic system of patients with AA, including those that achieved partial or complete remission after immunosuppressive treatment. Furthermore, this work suggests that such a proliferation deficiency is more pronounced in erythroid and multipotent progenitors than in their myeloid counterparts.