 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: The eight disorders comprising the FGFR-related craniosynostosis spectrum are Pfeiffer syndrome, Apert syndrome, Crouzon syndrome, Beare-Stevenson syndrome, FGFR2-related isolated coronal synostosis, Jackson-Weiss syndrome, Crouzon syndrome with acanthosis nigricans (AN), and Muenke syndrome (isolated coronal synostosis caused by the p.Pro250Arg mutation in FGFR3). Muenke syndrome and FGFR2-related isolated coronal synostosis are characterized only by uni- or bicoronal craniosynostosis; the remainder are characterized by bicoronal craniosynostosis or cloverleaf skull, distinctive facial features, and variable hand and foot findings.  DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Muenke syndrome is based on identification of the p.Pro250Arg mutation in FGFR3; the diagnosis of FGFR2-related isolated coronal synostosis is based on identification of a FGFR2 disease-causing mutation. The diagnosis of the other six FGFR-related craniosynostosis syndromes is based on clinical findings; molecular genetic testing of FGFR1, FGFR2, and FGFR3 may be helpful in establishing the specific diagnosis in questionable cases.  MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management by a multidisciplinary craniofacial clinic affiliated with a major pediatric medical center when possible; syndromic craniosynostosis usually requires a series of staged surgical procedures (craniotomy and fronto-orbital advancement) tailored to individual needs; for syndromic craniosynostosis, the first surgery is often as early as age three months, for nonsyndromic craniosynostosis the first surgery is often between ages six months and one year; congenital spine anomalies need immediate attention; surgical correction of limb defects depends on the nature of the skeletal anomalies.  Prevention of secondary complications: Early treatment of craniofacial anomalies may reduce the risk for secondary complications such as hydrocephalus and cognitive impairment; ophthalmologic lubrication can prevent exposure keratopathy in those with severe proptosis.  Surveillance: For hydrocephalus in those at increased risk.  Testing of relatives at risk: Evaluation of at-risk relatives clinically and radiographically or with molecular genetic testing if the disease-causing mutation in the family is known, so that mildly affected relatives can benefit from early intervention.  GENETIC COUNSELING: The FGFR-related craniosynostosis syndromes are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Affected individuals have a 50% chance of passing the disease-causing mutation to each child. Prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the disease-causing mutation has been identified in the family; however, its use is limited by poor predictive value. 