BACKGROUND: A hypercoagulable state is often associated with an acute stroke in cerebrovascular disease (CVD). However, in Binswanger disease (BD), no information is available on the coagulation-fibrinolysis pathway except for the presence of high plasma fibrinogen levels. OBJECTIVE: To determine the association of BD and coagulation-fibrinolysis pathway activation. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We examined the levels of fibrinogen, thrombin-antithrombin complex, prothrombin fragment(1+2), and cross-linked D-dimer in 17 patients with BD, 24 neurologic patients without CVD, and 26 patients with lacunar infarction in either the acute or chronic stage. RESULTS: As compared with the non-CVD and lacunar infarction groups, the patients with BD had significantly elevated levels of thrombin-antithrombin complex (P<.001), prothrombin fragment(1+2) (P<.05), and cross-linked D-dimer (P<.01). There was also a significant increase in fibrinogen levels compared with the non-CVD group (P<.05). In the BD group, 8 patients in stable condition (ie, those without obvious neurologic deficits in the past 3 months) showed normal levels or a mild increase in their fibrinogen, thrombin-antithrombin complex, prothrombin fragment(1+2), or cross-linked D-dimer levels. In contrast, 9 patients with BD with a subacute aggravation of their focal or subcortical cerebral functions (deteriorating group) showed a significant increase in their thrombin-antithrombin complex levels compared with the stable patients (P<.01). Similarly, the fibrinogen, prothrombin fragment(1+2), and cross-linked D-dimer levels were elevated in the deteriorating patients, but this trend did not reach statistical significance. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the coagulation-fibrinolysis pathway is activated in patients with BD with a subacute aggravation. Coagulation activation may result in the formation of microthrombi and microcirculatory disturbances in the brains of these patients, and thus promote further biological and neurologic insults.