CADASIL disease (Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy) was described in 1991 by Tourmier-Lasserve. Two years later the same authors described its association with chromosome 19; nonetheless, the mutations in gene Notch3 were not described until 1996. Clinical findings depend on the age at onset. The early form of the illness is found in young patients, generally less than 30 years old, and the main clinical manifestation is a migraine headache with subcortical lesions in the white matter, while in the later form ischemic events and behavioral symptoms are predominant. Anatomo-pathological findings in CADASIL include the presence of osmophilic granular deposits in vessel walls, skin, muscles and cerebral arteries. We present a patient with CADASIL and cavernous angioma. We studied a 40-year-old woman who underwent surgery for a left temporal-parietal cavernous angioma, with aphasia as the only symptom, two years before admission. Her family history showed that her father had suffered from vascular dementia. She was admitted to our hospital with right-side hemiparesis and dysarthria. A CT scan showed the presence of ischemic vascular lesions and former surgery sequelae. The duplex scan of the neck vessels and a transesophageal echocardiogram ruled out an embolic source. Laboratory tests including VDRL, HIV, prothrombotic profile and rheumatologic screening tests were normal. An MRI in T2W and FLAIR showed the presence of multiple subcortical cerebral lesions and hyperintensity in the white matter (leukoencephalopaty). We found a left acute putaminal-capsular infarct in the diffusion-MRI. The MRA was normal. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid was unremarkable. A molecular DNA test was performed, and a nucleotide substitution in position 583 in exon 4 of gene Notch3 was detected. This mutation was found only in CADASIL patients. The association with cavernous angioma has not been previously reported, and we believe that it was unrelated to CADASIL, either clinically or genetically. To our knowledge, this is the first case of CADASIL diagnosed by molecular DNA test in our country.