INTRODUCTION: Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia are the two most common types of dementia, with significant overlap of clinical symptoms and pathology. Previous results from a 6-month, double-blind, placebo-controlled, international, multicentre study of the cholinomimetic galantamine in patients with probable vascular dementia or mixed dementia (Alzheimer's disease with cerebrovascular disease) showed significant cognitive, behavioural and functional benefits in these patients. Furthermore, results of a 6-month, open-label extension of this study confirmed that patients with vascular dementia or Alzheimer's disease with cerebrovascular disease may benefit from galantamine therapy for at least 1 year. The objective of the current analysis was to determine if the long-term cognitive benefits of galantamine seen in the above-mentioned study are influenced by dementia type (probable vascular dementia vs Alzheimer's disease with cerebrovascular disease). STUDY DESIGN: A post hoc sub-analysis of a 6-month, multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study and a subsequent 6-month, open-label extension. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients diagnosed with probable vascular dementia or Alzheimer's disease with cerebrovascular disease were treated with galantamine (Reminyl) 24 mg/day for 12 months (6 months double-blind and 6 months open-label) or placebo for 6 months (double-blind) followed by galantamine 24 mg/day for 6 months (open-label). Changes in scores on the 11-item Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog/11) were assessed at months 6, 7.5 and 12. Mean changes from baseline were analysed. RESULTS: Patients with probable vascular dementia treated with galantamine for 6 or 12 months showed significant improvements in ADAS-cog/11 scores versus baseline, which were maintained at the end of the 12-month study. Patients who had Alzheimer's disease with cerebrovascular disease continuously treated with galantamine maintained the cognitive abilities seen at baseline for at least 12 months. Additionally, patients who had Alzheimer's disease with cerebrovascular disease who were switched from placebo to open-label galantamine therapy for 6 months demonstrated cognitive benefits, but these benefits were significantly less than those observed in patients treated with galantamine continuously for the 12-month period. Galantamine was well tolerated throughout the entire 12-month study. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the drug is efficacious for such common forms of dementia as vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease with cerebrovascular disease. Moreover, some patients benefit from galantamine therapy that is initiated early, soon after diagnosis, and continued for at least 1 year.