 OBJECTIVES: To establish a community health care system for screening community-dwelling older people with mild cognitive decline (MCD) and early diagnosis by a medical specialist. METHODS: Out of all the elderly residents aged 65 years and over living in Yoita town in 2000 (n = 1673), 1544 participated in the interview survey held at community halls or at home (92.3% response). They underwent a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) for assessment of cognitive function and answered questionnaires covering socio-demographic, psychological, physical and medical, and social activity items (2000/11). We defined cognitive decline as an MMSE < or = 1 SD below the age-specific mean (n = 371). Out of a total eligible population of 332, 158 pairs of subjects and their proxies participated in a follow-up survey (2001/11). The subjects themselves underwent MMSE again, and were asked for complaints of memory-related problems. Proxies answered about functional capacity and memory-related problems of subjects, for which we assessed the level of dementia with the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR). We established criteria for encouragement to undergo detailed examination by a medical specialist as follows. 1) MMSE scores < or = 1 SD below age-specific means at both baseline and follow-up surveys, or 2) CDR > or = 0.5, and 3) not due to mental retardation. RESULTS: Non-participants had significant higher MMSE scores but were younger in the follow-up survey. Out of 96 subjects eligible for the detailed examination, 47 participants showed a tendency for older age with lower MMSE scores or younger age with higher MMSE scores than the average in the follow-up survey. The detailed examinations confirmed dementia of Alzheimer's type in 22 and vascular dementia in 13 on DSM-IV or magnetic resonance imaging. During our screening, 8 community care saloons were opened and the number of facilities for older people with cognitive decline is increasing. CONCLUSIONS: To establish a community health care system to screen and cope with community-dwelling older people with MCD in earlier stages, increased awareness of residents with slight MCD is especially important. Our attempt also suggested the importance of educational lectures, methods for testing cognitive function, and dementia care activity.