 BACKGROUND: There are obvious changes in neuropeptides from plasma and cerebrospinal fluid in patients with vascular dementia (VaD), and regulating the levels of neuropeptides is a key for prevention and treatment of VaD. OBJECTIVE: To observe the clinical efficacy of moxibustion at head-points in treatment of vascular dementia (VaD), and assess its effects on memory-related neuropeptides. DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS AND INTERVENTIONS: A total of 65 VaD patients from Acupuncture Hospital, Anhui University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, were randomly divided into moxibustion group (33 cases) and Western medicine group (32 cases). Patients in the moxibustion group were treated with indirect moxibustion with common monkshood cake for 20 min. Patients in the Western medicine group were orally administered piracetam tablets, 0.8 g for three times a day. One treatment course was 4 weeks, and they were treated for 4 treatment courses. Main outcome measures: The scores of Hasegawa's Dementia Scale (HDS), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and Activity of Daily Living Scale (ADL), as well as the levels of learning and memory-related neuropeptides from cerebrospinal fluid such as somatostatin (SS) and arginine vasopressin (AVP) were measured before and after treatment in the two groups. RESULTS: Total response rate was significantly higher in the moxibustion group than in the Western medicine group (P<0.01). There were significant differences in scores of HDS, MMSE and ADL between before and after treatment in the two groups(P<0.05 or P<0.01). After treatment, the scores of HDS, MMSE and ADL in the moxibustion group were more improved as compared with those in the Western medicine group (P<0.05 or P<0.01). The levels of SS and AVP after treatment were higher than those before treatment in the two groups(P<0.01). After treatment, the increased levels of SS and AVP were higher in the moxibustion group than in the Western medicine group (P<0.01). CONCLUSION: Moxibustion is effective in improving the clinical symptom scores and regulating the levels of neuropeptides associated with learning and memory in VaD patients.