Acetylcholine is an endogenous neurotransmitter at cholinergic synapses and neuroeffector junctions in the peripheral and central nervous systems. It acts on nicotinic and muscarinic receptors to mediate complex functions, such as attention, memory, cognition, and consciousness. Degeneration of cholinergic neurons has been observed in several neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD), but not in vascular dementia. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is the enzyme that terminates cholinergic actions through the rapid hydrolysis of acetylcholine to choline and acetate. AChE is localized on both cholinergic and cholinoceptive neurons in the brain, with the highest activity in the striatum, thalamus, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex (1). AChE has been a target for radioligand development as well as drug development because its levels decrease in AD (1, 2). Radiolabeled AChE inhibitors and acetylcholine analog substrates are the two major approaches to mapping AChE in vivo in the human brain. For measurements of AChE activity, various labeled esters of 1-methy-4-hydroxypiperidine have been designed and evaluated as acetylcholine substrate analogs (3). One of these analogs, N-[11C]methylpiperidin-4-yl acetate ([11C]MP4A), was chosen for further development as a positron emission tomography (PET) radioligand (4). [11C]MP4A has a tertiary amine structure that makes it lipophilic, and thus it readily crosses the blood–brain barrier (BBB). [11C]MP4A is specifically hydrolyzed by AChE (99% specificity) and yields a hydrophilic metabolite, N-[11C]methylpiperidinol ([11C]MP4OH), which is trapped in the brain because it is too polar to cross the BBB. [11C]MP4A is being developed as a PET agent for the non-invasive study of brain AChE activity in patients with AD and PD. Because 18F, with a longer physical half-life, has an advantage over 11C, N-[18F]fluoroethylpiperidin-4ylmethyl acetate ([18F]FEP-4MA), an analog of [11C]MP4A, has been evaluated as a potential PET agent for AChE activity in the brain (5).