 BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Because DTI can provide good markers of white matter pathology, it could be useful in differentiating white matter changes of INPH from those of other dementias. The aim of this study was, by using DTI, to compare the characteristic white matter changes in INPH with those in AD, subcortical vascular dementia, and healthy control subjects. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixteen patients with presurgical INPH, 10 with AD, 10 with subcortical vascular dementia, and 20 healthy control subjects underwent DTI. All patients with INPH showed clinical improvement after shunt surgery, and 9 of them also underwent postshunting DTI. Regions of interest were selected at the periventricular white matter, the anterior limb of the internal capsule, the posterior limb of the internal capsule, the genu and the splenium of the corpus callosum, the superior longitudinal fasciculus, and the inferior longitudinal fasciculus. FA and MD were obtained from each region of interest and were compared among the groups. RESULTS: Presurgical INPH showed significantly higher FA than all the other groups in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, which was decreased after shunt surgery. Presurgical MD of the INPH group was higher than that in the AD and healthy control groups but lower than that in the subcortical vascular dementia group in the anterior periventricular white matter, the anterior limb of the internal capsule, and the superior longitudinal fasciculus. In differentiating INPH, the sensitivity and specificity of FA in the posterior limb of the internal capsule was 87.5% and 95.0%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with shunt-responsive INPH showed higher FA in the posterior limb of the internal capsule compared with healthy controls and those in other groups of dementia that was reversible with shunt surgery. With this parameter, shunt-responsive INPH could be distinguished from AD, subcortical vascular dementia, and healthy conditions with high diagnostic accuracy.