Co-clustering B cell receptors (BCR) and type II receptors binding the Fc part of IgG (Fc gamma RIIb) inhibits B cell activation and antibody production. Tyrosine phosphorylation of an intracellular motif of Fc gamma RIIb has been shown to be a prerequisite of the inhibition. After being phosphorylated by BCR-activated tyrosine kinases, the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (P-ITIM) of Fc gamma RIIb recruits SH2 domain containing protein tyrosine phosphatase(s) (PTPs) and polyphosphoinositol 5-phosphatase (SHIP) to the vicinity of BCR, which in turn dephosphorylate their specific substrates. This leads to the interruption of signal transduction, consequently to the anergy and/or apoptosis of the cell. The downstream signaling pathways affected by Fc gamma RIIb-BCR co-clustering are not clarified yet, neither the substrates of PTPs are known. We have studied the Fc gamma RIIb mediated B cell inhibition on human Burkitt lymphoma cell line (BL41). From the lysates of BL41 cells SHP-2 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K), as well as the protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) Lyn bind both to the BCR-co-clustered Fc gamma RIIb and to its P-ITIM peptide. Lyn hyperphosphorylates the P-ITIM associated molecules, including SHIP in the in vitro protein tyrosine kinase activity assay. The P-ITIM-compelled multi-phosphoprotein complex binds to and activates SHP-2, which in turn dephosphorylates SHIP and Shc and probably other substrates. Subcellular localisation of these signaling molecules is regulated by the phosphotyrosine-SH2 domain interactions, thus dephosphorylation may result in the re-direction of Shc and SHIP within the cell, consequently, in the modulation of their activity. Finally, co-clustering Fc gamma RIIb and BCR or Fc gamma RIIb and CD19 on the intact cells inhibited PI3-K activity as detected in the anti-phosphotyrosine (anti-PY) precipitates. The results indicate that SHP-2 bound to and activated by the BCR co-clustered Fc gamma RIIb, may down-regulate PI3-K activity by dephosphorylating a yet unidentified regulatory molecule, which recruits PI3-K to the cell membrane.