Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) blasts undergo migration into layers of bone marrow fibroblasts (BMF) in vitro, utilizing the beta1 integrins VLA-4 and VL-5 as adhesion molecules. However, it has been unclear as to whether this is a selective process mediated by specific chemoattractant molecules, or simply a reflection of the highly motile nature of early B cell precursors. We further characterized this process using a transwell culture system, in which the two chambers were separated by an 8 microm diameter microporous membrane, through which leukemic cells could move. When a BMF layer was grown on the upper surface of the membrane there was an 84.1% reduction in transmigration of the human pre-B ALL cell line NALM-6 into the lower chamber, compared to control membrane with no BMF layer. Localization of leukemic cells under the BMF layer was confirmed ultrastructurally, suggesting the possibility that the migration of leukemic cells was directed by a chemotactic agent secreted by BMF. The involvement of the chemokine stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) in this process was next investigated. BMF were shown to express m-RNA for SDF-1. Addition of SDF-1 at 100 ng/ml into the lower chamber increased transmigration of NALM-6 across the membrane by 2.2-fold, and also induced a 1.4- to 6.1-fold increase in movement of NALM-6 through a BMF layer into the lower chamber. The receptor for SDF-1, CXCR4, was demonstrated by flow cytometry on all 10 cases of precursor-B ALL analyzed, as well as on NALM-6, KM-3 and REH lines. An inhibitory antibody to CXCR4 was able to block the migration of NALM-6 cells into BMF monolayers grown on plastic by 51%, and in nine cases of ALL by 8-40%, as well as partially inhibit transmigration of leukemic cells through BMF layers along an SDF-1 concentration gradient. These results confirm that precursor-B ALL cells selectively localize within bone marrow stroma in vitro, and that this process is partially due to the stromal chemokine SDF-1 binding to its receptor CXCR4 on leukemic cells. SDF-1 may be important in influencing the localization of precursor-B ALL cells in marrow microenvironmental inches which regulate their survival and proliferation.