Upstream signaling requirements of retinoic acid (RA)-induced blr1 expression and downstream signaling consequences of blr1 over-expression in a human myeloid leukemia cell line demonstrate that mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling complexes are involved in both avenues. RA-induced myeloid differentiation and G1/G0 growth arrest of HL-60 cells is known to require the activation of the RARalpha and RXR retinoid receptors, as well as activation of the MAPK, ERK2. Transcriptional activation of the Burkitt's lymphoma receptor 1 (blr1) gene occurs early during RA-induced differentiation of HL-60 cells and requires these same three activating processes. The use of retinoid ligands that activate either the RARalpha or the RXR retinoid receptors revealed that blr1 mRNA induction was detectable only when both RARalpha and RXR were activated. Neither the RARalpha nor RXR selective ligands alone induced expression of blr1, but the combination of the two ligands induced the expression of blr1 to the same extent as RA. The MAPKK (MEK) inhibitor, PD98059, was used to determine whether extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK2) activation was necessary for induction of blr1 mRNA. PD98059 inhibited induced blr1 mRNA expression, due to RA or activated RARalpha plus RXR ligands, indicating that ERK2 activation is necessary for blr1 mRNA expression. Previous studies showed that ectopic expression of blr1 also caused increased MAPK activation, in particular ERK2, and subsequently accelerated RA-induced differentiation and G1/G0 growth arrest. Inhibition of ERK2 activation inhibited differentiation of blr1 transfectants, suggesting that the accelerated differentiation reflected blr1-enhanced ERK2 activation. The present data also demonstrate that ectopic expression of blr1 increased JNK/SAPK activity, but JNK/ SAPK activation was not needed for accelerated RA-induced differentiation and growth arrest. The results show that the signals known to be required for HL-60 differentiation, activated RARalpha, RXR, and ERK2, are necessary for blr1 mRNA expression. Downstream consequences of blr1 overexpression include enhanced MAPK signaling.