In a group of 102 children with different immunological subtypes of acute leukemia, both lymphoblastic and nonlymphoblastic, the clinical parameters - event free survival and overall survival were correlated with numerical and structural chromosomal abnormalities. In a group of 80 ALL patients genetic abnormalities were observed in 40 patients, from those 19 of numerical type, 17 of structural type and 4 with both, numerical and structural anomalies. From the whole ALL group observed 23 patients (28.75%) died. In 10 died patients genetic abnormalities were found and in 6 cases less mature T-phenotype ALL has been documented. It seems, therefore, that immature T-phenotype with pathological karyotypes of all types of genetic anomalies presents the most risk group of patients of which all children died. ALL patients, as a whole, with pathological karyotype have shown significantly lower event free survival rate, comparing to the group of ALL patients with normal karyotype. Overall survival rate was also lower in the first group, but statistically not significant. In T-ALL patients, in both groups, with and without pathological karyotype, event free survival rate and overall survival rate were also lower in the first group, but statistically not significant. In B-ALL patients with pathological karyotypes vs. normal ones overall survival rate was lower in the first group, but statistically not significant. There was no difference in overall survival rate in these patients between pathological and normal karyotypes. In ANNL group of patients pathological karyotype was observed in 14 of them, with numerical anomalies in 6 patients, structural in 4 patients and both of them - numerical + structural in 4 children. From the whole ANLL group observed 11 (50%) patients died during the follow-up period (9 in relapse and 2 of treatment complications). From 11 died patients in 81.8% pathological karyotype was present. The prevalence of pathological karyotypes was observed in less mature M0-M2 ANLL subtype (71.4%). ANLL patients with pathological karyotype have shown significantly lower event free survival rate (in one of the two statistical log-rank analyses), comparing to the group of ANLL patients with normal karyotype. Overall survival rate was also lower in the first group, but statistically not significant. The presence/absence of CD34 marker expression in blast cells of our group of acute leukemia patients did not show any difference in event free survival and overall survival rates.