PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to present an updated picture of surgical management of pediatric testicular tumors based on our 30 years' experience, which consisted of one of the largest noncollected series treated in a single medical center. METHODS: Records of children who were treated for testicular tumor in our unit from 1970 to 1999, inclusive, were reviewed retrospectively. Information recorded for each patient included age, sex, past medical history, clinical characteristics, diagnostic procedures, treatment methods, histopathologic findings, and outcome. RESULTS: Fifty-one patients with a mean age of 3.8 +/- 0.5 years were treated for testicular tumors. Of these, 35 (69%) had germ cell testis tumor (GCT) and 16 (31%) had non-germ cell testis tumor (NGCT). Endodermal sinus tumor and paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma were the dominant histologic subtypes in each group, respectively. The most common mode of presentation was painless scrotal mass. At initial presentation, retroperitoneal (n = 5), both retroperitoneal and lung (n = 2), and retroperitoneal and liver (n = 3) metastases were recorded in 10 (19%) patients. Initial operative procedures were radical inguinal orchiectomy (RIO) (n = 29), scrotal orchiectomy (SO; n = 9), bilateral RIO (n = 2), both RIO and unilateral retroperitoneal lymph node (RPLN) excision (n = 6), testis-sparing enucleation of the tumor (n = 5). SOs were performed elsewhere, and these patients underwent high ligation (n = 4) and both high ligation plus RPLN excision (n = 5) in our unit. Histopathologically, spermatic cord invasion and RPLN involvement were present in 10 patients. Scrotal recurrences were encountered in 2 patients who had scrotal orchiectomy initially. Retroperitoneal recurrences were noted in a patient presenting with stage I embryonal carcinoma and in 2 patients presenting with group IV paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma. The mean follow-up period was 89 +/- 10 months. Four patients with stage IV embryonal carcinoma (n = 2) and group IV paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma (n = 2) died of progression of the disease. All remaining patients were alive and disease free at their last outpatient appointment. No significant difference was noted with regard to 5-year survival rates between (1) malignant GCT and paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma patients (91% v 80%) and (2) patients treated by RIO (88%), SO plus high ligation (87%), and RIO plus RPLN excision (80%). Five-year survival rates were 100% for stage I, II, III patients and 33.3% for stage IV and group IV patients presenting with malignant testicular tumors (P <.05). CONCLUSIONS: Childhood testicular tumors deserve special attention from the therapeutic point of the view. A solid scrotal mass should be considered malignant until proved otherwise. Any suspicion of the testicular tumor warrants an inguinal approach to prevent scrotal violation by the tumor. Current trends emphasize that testis-sparing surgery should be performed for benign lesions such as teratoma, leydig cell tumor, and epidermoid cyst based on frozen biopsy findings. Literature findings and our experience suggest that RIO is the accurate treatment for stage I malignant GCT and group I and IIa paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma. RPLN excision is not of benefit either as a staging or therapeutic procedure in stage I and group I and IIa diseases of these tumors. RPLN excision should be reserved for (1) malignant GCT patients who have persistent elevation of alpha-fetoprotein after orchiectomy in the presence of normal total body CT scan, and for patients presenting with stage II and III disease with definitive abnormality on CT scans, and (2) group IIb, IIc, and III paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma patients with radiologic evidence of retroperitoneal involvement on CT scans. High ligation should be done as a complementary procedure after SO to increase the survival rates. J Pediatr Surg 36:1796-1801.