PURPOSE: We studied the antitumor activity of 2-amino-4,4alpha-dihydro-4alpha,7-dimethyl-3H-phenoxazine-3-one (Phx), which was synthesized by the reactions of 2-amino-5-methylphenol with bovine hemoglobin, on human B cell lymphoblastoid cell lines, P3HR-1 and Raji derived from African Burkitt's lymphoma, and the human T cell lymphoblastoid cell line Molt-4. We also studied whether Phx might cause apoptosis and necrosis in these cells. METHODS: We evaluated cell viability and apoptosis and necrosis of the cells in the presence of Phx, by using agarose gel electrophoresis, flow cytometry, and fluorescence microscopy. RESULTS: Phx suppressed the viability of P3HR-1, Raji, and Molt-4 cells, though the suppression patterns were different, i.e., Phx suppressed the viability of P3HR-1, Raji, and Molt-4 cells at higher concentrations, while the drug enhanced the viability of Raji cells, but not those of P3HR-1 and Molt-4 cells at lower concentrations. To investigate which type of cell death - apoptosis or necrosis - is induced by Phx, induction of DNA ladder, phosphatidylserine externalization, and propidium iodide-permeable cells were examined in Phx-treated cells. Although Phx did not induce DNA ladder formation, it induced the phosphatidylserine externalization and propidium iodide-permeable cells, suggesting that Phx caused a mixed type of cell death, both apoptosis and necrosis. The population of early stage apoptotic cells was dominant in Raji cells, and that of the late stage apoptotic/necrotic cells was dominant in Molt-4 cells after 72-h treatment with Phx. The population of the early stage apoptotic cells and the late stage apoptotic/necrotic cells was almost equal in P3HR-1 cells in the presence of Phx, though the population of both types of cells increased with time. The nuclear morphological analysis of Phx-treated Raji, P3HR-1, and Molt-4 cells also showed that Phx induces apoptosis. CONCLUSIONS: The present results suggest that Phx shows antitumor activity against human B cell-derived and T cell-derived lymphoblastoid cell lines, in vitro, causing apoptosis and necrosis.