CD22 is a membrane glycophosphoprotein found on nearly all healthy B-lymphocytes and most B-cell lymphomas. Recent in vitro studies have identified several anti-CD22 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that block the interaction of CD22 with its ligand. One of these mAbs, HB22.7, has been shown to effectively induce apoptosis in several B-cell lymphoma cell lines. Lymphoma xenograft studies with Raji-xenograft mice were used to assess the toxicity and efficacy of HB22.7 alone and with combined modality immunotherapy (CMIT) with yttrium (90)Y-DOTA-peptide-Lym-1 radioimmunotherapy (RIT). The effect of the sequence of these agents on the combined treatment was assessed by administering HB22.7 24 hours before, simultaneously with, or 24 hours after RIT. Within the groups treated with RIT alone or with RIT and HB22.7 (CMIT), the reduction in tumor volume was the greatest when HB22.7 was administered simultaneously with and 24 hours after RIT, and in the RIT treatment groups, this translated into the greatest overall response and survival, respectively. Overall survival rates at the end of the 84-day CMIT trial were 67% and 50% in the groups treated with HB22.7 simultaneously and 24 hours after RIT, respectively. This compared favorably with the untreated and the RIT alone groups, which had survival rates of 38% and 43% at the end of the trial. Surprisingly, when compared with untreated controls and all other treatment groups, the greatest cure and overall survival rates were observed in the group treated with HB22.7 alone, with 47% cured and 76% surviving at the end of the 84-day trial. RIT clearance was not affected by treatment with HB22.7. When compared with RIT alone, there was no significant additional hematologic (white blood cell, red blood cell, or platelet count) toxicity when HB22.7 was added to RIT. Nonhematologic toxicity (assessed as change in body weight) was also unchanged when HB22.7 was added to RIT. Thus the anti-CD22 ligand-blocking antibody HB22.7 has independent lymphomacidal properties and augments the efficacy of (90)Y-DOTA-peptide-Lym-1 in lymphoma xenografts without significant toxicity.