Specific host-graft interactions, as well as intrinsic properties of transferred cell, determine tumorigenicity in xenogeneic systems. We compared the growth characteristics of human B-lymphoid cell lines in SCID mice with the well characterized growth pattern in nude mice and observed striking differences in malignancy in the respective hosts. Two cell lines derived from the same individual, the Epstein-Barr-virus(EBV)-positive Burkitt's lymphoma BL 60 (BL) and the autologous EBV-immortalized lymphoblastoid cell line IARC 277 (LCL) were used. In addition, we tested somatic cell hybrids (HYB) of both cell lines, which despite the LCL-like differentiation phenotype show the de-regulated c-myc expression pattern of the parental BL line, assumed to be a critical factor in BL pathogenesis. Subcutaneously (s.c.) injected BL cells produced local progressively growing tumor masses at the injection site without distant metastases in both nude and SCID mice. Although both mouse strains possess the same genetic background (BALB/c) and differ only in the B-cell sub-set, the growth patterns of the LCL and hybrids were completely different. In contrast to the regressive behaviour of LCL and hybrids in nude mice, these lines show invasive and disseminated progressive growth in SCID mice. Peripheral lymph nodes an thymic tissue were preferentially colonized, whereas mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue (Peyer's patches and appendix) and spleen were not infiltrated. The preferential migration of lymphocytes to certain tissues is termed homing in a syngeneic system and mediated by homing receptors and vascular addressins. The "homing" of LCL and hybrids into lymphoid SCID mouse tissue suggests a strong interaction with the endothelial cells of the host. Detailed phenotypic analysis of BL, LCL and 3 different hybrids was performed using an antibody panel against differentiation and adhesion markers. Overall dominance of the LCL phenotype was observed in the hybrids, as indicated by cytology, tumor growth, dissemination and the pattern of surface-marker expression. The c-myc activation in hybrids does not appear to influence growth behavior.