BACKGROUND: The role of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in lymphoproliferative lesions has been widely accepted. Most of these lesions occur in patients who have deficiencies in their immune status. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis (LG) is a lymphoproliferative disorder originally characterized as an angiocentric, necrotizing, pleomorphic infiltrate of mononuclear cells. The etiology of LG is unknown. It was originally hypothesized that LG may represent an unusual lymphoid response to an infective organism, possibly EBV. METHODS: Tissues from a previously healthy 60-year-old, healthy white man with primary cerebellar lymphomatoid granulomatosis were examined for the presence of EBV by nucleic acid hybridization. RESULTS: The original LG lesion was a polyclonal B-cell proliferation that contained detectable amounts of EBV. Peripheral blood leukocytes were negative for EBV by the same assay. After an 18-month remission, a tumor reappeared near the site of the primary lesion, which had the histologic appearance of a lymphoma. The cells showed restricted clonality and contained a similar amount of EBV-related DNA as the original lesion. Peripheral blood leukocytes at the time of recurrence were negative for EBV. The patient died approximately 2 months after the recurrent tumor was detected. CONCLUSIONS: This case demonstrated the development of a primary cerebellar B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder, histologically identical to lymphomatoid granulomatosis, that transformed into a lymphoma. The original tumor and the subsequent lymphoma contained, on average, several copies of EBV-related DNA per cell. Despite an extensive survey of the patient, no immune deficit was detected. Interpretation of the literature with the results of this case suggest that this instance of primary cerebellar LG arose as a consequence of an unusual EBV-associated B-cell lymphoproliferation. It is suggested that EBV may be a significant factor in the initiation of the abnormal proliferations of T-cells or B-cells reported in this disorder.