On a panel of nine human B cell lines we showed that the expression of the complement regulatory factors complement receptor type 2 (CR2; CD21), decay-accelerating factor, (DAF; CD55) and homologous restriction factor (HRF20, CD59) is not correlated. All lines expressed DAF, six lines carried detectable amounts of CR2 and three carried HRF20. Upon incubation in human serum, under conditions which allowed the activation of complement through the alternative pathway, the CR2-carrying lines bound C3 fragments and two of them (Ramos and one of its two sublines) were damaged. These two lines had the lowest DAF expression, less than 50% of the cells reacted with the IA10 monoclonal antibody. By modulating the expression of the complement regulatory molecules, the lytic sensitivity of the B cell lines could be altered. Blockade of DAF on the HRF20-, CR2+ lines with the specific monoclonal antibodies increased their sensitivity to lysis by human serum. With the DAF- and HRF20+ cells significant lytic effect was obtained only when they were pretreated with both of the specific antibodies. Interferon-gamma or tumor necrosis factor-alpha treatment elevated the amount of CR2 on the low-CR2 expressor line (Ramos/HR1K) which thereafter bound higher amounts of C3 fragments and was lysed when incubated in human serum. This line had relatively low DAF level and lacked HRF20. The cytokine treatment did not alter the expression of these molecules. The CR2+ Ramos and the CR2- Rael cells were treated with 5-azacytidine which induced HRF20 and increased DAF expression. In parallel with this change Ramos cells became resistant to C-mediated lysis. The experiments with the panel of human B cell lines showed thus that cytolysis through activation of complement in homologous serum can be regulated at several steps by cell surface molecules. While expression of CR2 was required for C3 fixation, DAF and HRF20 inhibited lysis. By independent modulation of the quantities of these molecules, cells acquired or lost their sensitivity.