Conjugate formation between cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) and target B cells, as observed in vitro, is mediated by interactions between adhesion molecules on the two cell surfaces rather than involving immune recognition through the T cell receptor. It is still not clear to what extent such adhesive contacts facilitate the process of immune recognition and target cell lysis. However, work on the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated malignancy Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) has suggested that down-regulation of one particular adhesion molecule, the lymphocyte function-associated antigen LFA-3, on the tumor cell surface is a key factor in allowing these target cells to escape EBV-specific T cell surveillance. To examine this directly, we used a cDNA for the full-length transmembrane form of LFA-3 to construct a recombinant vaccinia virus (Vacc-LFA 3), which is capable of restoring surface LFA-3 in adhesion molecule-negative BL cell lines to levels as high as seen in EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL); biochemical studies confirmed expression of the authentic N-glycosylated protein. The recombinant vaccinia-encoded LFA-3 was functional as an adhesion molecule since BL cells acutely infected with Vacc-LFA-3 then acquired the ability to form conjugates with activated T cells in vitro. However, there was no clear dependence upon LFA-3 when such BL cell lines were tested as targets for cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL). Firstly, LFA-3- BL cells could be killed by allospecific CTL recognizing HLA class I alloantigens, in some cases as efficiently as the corresponding LCL. In other cases where lysis was slightly below that of the LCL, Vacc-LFA-3 infection of the BL cells increased lysis up to, but never beyond, LCL values. Secondly, we studied the sensitivity of BL to EBV-specific HLA class I-restricted CTL using a BL target line which was LFA-3- but which expressed the same spectrum of EBV target proteins as an LCL. This line was not recognized by appropriately HLA-matched effectors, even after restoration of LFA-3 expression. We conclude that the LFA-3 status of BL cells influences their conjugate forming ability in in vitro assays but not necessarily their sensitivity to immune T cell-mediated cytolysis.