Tumor classification is a well-studied problem in the field of bioinformatics. Developments in the field of DNA chip design have now made it possible to measure the expression levels of thousands of genes in sample tissue from healthy cell lines or tumors. A number of studies have examined the problems of tumor classification: class discovery, the problem of defining a number of classes of tumors using the data from a DNA chip, and class prediction, the problem of accurately classifying an unknown tumor, given expression data from the unknown tumor and from a learning set. The current work has applied phylogenetic methods to both problems. To solve the class discovery problem, we impose a metric on a set of tumors as a function of their gene expression levels, and impose a tree structure on this metric, using standard tree fitting methods borrowed from the field of phylogenetics. Phylogenetic methods provide a simple way of imposing a clear hierarchical relationship on the data, with branch lengths in the classification tree representing the degree of separation witnessed. We tested our method for class discovery on two data sets: a data set of 87 tissues, comprised mostly of small, round, blue-cell tumors (SRBCTs), and a data set of 22 breast tumors. We fit the 87 samples of the first set to a classification tree, which neatly separated into four major clusters corresponding exactly to the four groups of tumors, namely neuroblastomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, Burkitt's lymphomas, and the Ewing's family of tumors. The classification tree built using the breast cancer data separated tumors with BRCA1 mutations from those with BRCA2 mutations, with sporadic tumors separated from both groups and from each other. We also demonstrate the flexibility of the class discovery method with regard to standard resampling methodology such as jackknifing and noise perturbation. To solve the class prediction problem, we built a classification tree on the learning set, and then sought the optimal placement of each test sample within the classification tree. We tested this method on the SRBCT data set, and classified each tumor successfully.