Apoptosis is the primary mechanism through which most chemotherapeutic agents induce tumor cell death. The balance in the expression of pro (Fas/CD95) and anti-apoptotic protein (Bcl-2) may control the response of leukemic cells to chemotherapy and subsequently affect the patient's prognosis. The aim of this study was to determine the levels of Bcl-2 and Fas expression on blast cells from patients with acute leukemia and to correlate the degree of expression to the clinical and laboratory prognostic factors and the patient's outcome. Forty newly diagnosed patients with acute leukemia (16 ALL, 24 AML) were included in the study. Ten normal subjects of matched age and sex were studied as a reference control group. The degree of Bcl-2 and Fas expression on acute leukemia blast cells were assessed before the start of therapy and on mononuclear cells after 1 year of follow up, using flow cytometry. The degree of Bcl-2 and Fas expression were significantly higher in AML (P<0.01,<0.05, respectively) and ALL (P<0.01, <0.05, respectively) as compared to controls. The expression of Fas and Bcl-2 was related to FAB type with the highest Bcl-2 and lowest Fas expression in M5 and T-ALL (P<0.01, for all). In ALL, patients responding to induction chemotherapy revealed lower Bcl-2 and higher Fas expression when compared to non-responders (P<0.05). In contrast, in AML the difference between responders and non-responders to induction chemotherapy regarding Bcl-2 and Fas expressions was not statistically significant (P>0.05). Bcl-2 and Fas expression were significantly elevated in the relapsed acute leukemia group (in both AML and ALL) when compared to those in remission (P<0.01, <0.05, respectively). Bcl-2 and Fas expression at diagnosis was not significantly different when those surviving were compared to the group who had died, either in the ALL or AML groups (P>0.05). Bcl-2 expression was significantly correlated to bone marrow blast cell counts (R=0.6, P<0.01), blast cell distribution ratio (R=0.4, P<0.05) and lymphadenopathy (R=0.33, P<0.05). Whereas Fas expression was significantly correlated to bone marrow blast cell counts (R=0.52, P<0.01). In conclusion, assessment of Bcl-2 and Fas expression at diagnosis in acute leukemia (1) could predict responsiveness to induction chemotherapy in ALL but not in AML group but (2) could not predict patients out come both in ALL and AML groups.