Genetic abnormalities and immune system disorders resulting from them are the causes of neoplastic diseases as well as inflammatory bowel disease, including Crohn's disease. However, the rearrangement of genes may not only be the cause of neoplasms but also the result of oncolytic treatment used. One of the late treatment-related complications of neoplastic diseases is the development of a second neoplasm and possible disorders belonging to the group of inflammatory bowel diseases, for example Crohn's disease. The paper presents the case of a 13-year-old boy (K.G.) treated for a second neoplasm, complicated by Crohn's disease. The patient was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia -- middle risk group (ALL-MRG) at the age of 3, treated according to the BFM 87 Protocol (dexamethasone, prednisone, vincristine, daunoribicin, asparaginase, cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, mercaptopurine, methotrexate, thioguanine, doxorubicin), and complete remission was achieved. Eight years after the first line treatment the boy was diagnosed with the second neoplastic process -- pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL-L2 pre-B common +). The ALLIC 2002 Protocol (dexamethasone, prednisone, vincristine, daunoribicin, asparaginase, cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, mercaptopurine. methotrexate, thioguanine, doxorubicin) was started. On day 71 of the therapy, during aplasia of blood marrow following chemotherapy, inflammation of the caecum was diagnosed and metronidazole was introduced. Once blood counts improved, the complaints decreased and with continued chemotherapy of Protocol M (mercaptopurine, methotrexate), completely subsided. The symptoms reappeared during the 2-week break before Protoco II. The physical examination revealed the presence of a hard, painless tumour (3 x 10 cm) in the right iliac fossa. Colonoscopy showed a cauliflower-like formation within the Mauchin's valve projecting to the caecum lumen. The histopathological evaluation of the sections demonstrated a typical picture of Crohn's disease. Crohn's disease of the ileum was diagnosed, the treatment with dexamethazone (according to Protocol II) was instituted which led to complete regression of the iliac lesions. Steroid therapy (prednisone) continued until the treatment supporting the remission according to Protocol ALLIC 2002 (mercaptopurine, methotrexate orally) was initiated. CONCLUSION: The differential diagnosis of complications accompanying neoplasms should consider the inflammatory bowel diseases; their atypical course may be masked by the treatment of the underlying disease.