The lysis of tumor cells, and other nucleated mammalian cells, by neutrophilic polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) triggered by phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) represents a widely used model system to dissect the PMN cytolytic armamentarium, potentially responsible for the cell damage at tissue sites of PMN activation. Although oxidants are generally considered to be instrumental in the target lysis by PMNs, the mediators actually involved remain a matter of controversy. Moreover, other factors potentially crucial to the lysis have not been clearly identified. In order to reexamine the determinants of the cytolytic process, we studied the events underlying the PMA-triggered PMN-delivered attack against two different targets, selected on the basis of preliminary experiments (B lymphoblastoid Daudi cells and erythroleukemic K 562 cells). The results suggest that the lysis is promoted by hypochlorous acid (HOCl) or a compound with characteristics very similar to HOCl itself. No evidence was obtained for the intervention or contribution of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydroxyl (OH.) radicals, and the major HOCl-derived chloramines. PMNs appeared to use 35% of the generated H2O2 to produce HOCl, while the remainder appears to be consumed by PMNs themselves and target cells as well. Moreover, PMNs and target cells coaggregated at an early step of the cytolytic reaction, through a process efficiently prevented by a monoclonal antibody (MoAb J-90) directed against leukocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1). The inhibition of the PMN-target aggregation by the MoAb J-90 resulted in the impairment of the lysis, despite a normal generation of HOCl. Thus, the data demonstrate that the PMA-triggered lysis of tumor target cells by PMNs requires at least two events, occurring simultaneously: the LFA-1-mediated effector-target adherence and the PMN production of HOCl. The intervention of the LFA-1-mediated PMN-target adherence in the PMA-triggered lysis is likely to allow PMNs to focus HOCl on the target cell surface and suggests that the process requires a sort of molecule to molecule recognition at the effector-target surface level.