Jaw1, also known as lymphoid-restricted membrane protein (LRMP), is an endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein. High levels of Jaw1/LRMP mRNA have been found in germinal centre B-cells and in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas of 'germinal centre' subtype. This paper documents Jaw1/LRMP expression at the protein level in human tissues by immunohistochemical and western blotting analysis using an antibody reactive with paraffin-embedded tissues. Jaw1/LRMP was highly expressed in germinal centre B-cells (in keeping with gene expression data), in 'monocytoid B-cells', and in splenic marginal zone B-cells. It was absent, or present at only low levels, in mature T-cells, although cortical thymocytes were weakly positive. Among lymphoid neoplasms, Jaw1/LRMP was found in germinal centre-derived lymphomas (follicle centre lymphoma, Burkitt's lymphoma, lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease) but not in T-cell neoplasms (with the exception of a single T lymphoblastic lymphoma). Classical Hodgkin's disease and myeloma lacked Jaw1/LRMP but many cases of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (but not mantle zone lymphoma) were Jaw1/LRMP-positive. Approximately half of the marginal zone lymphomas were Jaw1/LRMP-positive. In diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, Jaw1/LRMP was found in three-quarters (24/32) of the cases classified phenotypically as being of 'germinal centre' type, but it was also expressed in almost half (13/28) of the 'non-germinal centre' cases. A similar proportion of 'non-germinal centre' cases were positive for the protein products of two other genes expressed highly in germinal centre cells (HGAL/GCET2 and PAG). The fact that all three of these proteins are expressed in a significant proportion of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas assigned to the 'non-germinal centre' category indicates that the immunophenotypic categorization of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma according to cellular origin may be more complicated than currently understood. Finally, the expression of Jaw1/LRMP in other types of lymphoma and in non-lymphoid tissues/tumours may be of interest in differential diagnosis and research.