We have studied four cases of fatal B-cell lymphoproliferative syndrome (LPS) developing among 333 patients (incidence 1.2%) treated with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). All four patients had received a T-cell depleted graft. Onset of the first clinical symptoms (palpable lymph node enlargement in three and IgA-lambda paraproteinemia in two patients) occurred between 41 and 188 days post-BMT (median 76 days). The course of the LPS was rapidly progressive in all cases, leading to death in 2-5 weeks. The peripheral blood showed progressive pancytopenia with disproportionally high numbers of activated NK cells, apparently compensating for the T-cell deficiency. Post-mortem histological studies disclosed polymorphic B-cell proliferations, most pronounced in the lymph nodes, spleen, liver, lungs and kidneys. Lymphohemopoietic cells were of donor origin in three patients. In the fourth patient, graft failure suggested a host origin for the proliferating cells. Immunophenotyping and gene rearrangement analysis revealed polyclonal proliferation in one patient, monoclonal proliferation in another patient, and an oligoclonal pattern in the other two patients. The clinical behavior of the LPS was independent of clonality. Immunohistologically, the proliferating cells showed characteristics of relatively mature B-cells in three cases, and pre-B-cell features in one case. Epstein Barr virus (EBV) serology indicated seroconversion (primary infection) in one child, and chronic active EBV infection in both adults. EBV DNA as well as EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA) were detected in infiltrated tissues of all four patients. The labeling pattern on in situ hybridization suggested a replicative EBV infection comparable to that in lymphoblastoid cell lines. We conclude that EBV-associated LPS developing as a result of post-transplant immunodeficiency is a distinct clinicopathologic entity, differing from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (including Burkitt's lymphoma) and infectious mononucleosis of the immunocompetent host.