The cytotoxicity mediated by the CD2+ CD3- lymphocyte subset, either NK or LAK, is puzzling since no specific antigen recognition structures, equivalent to the CD3-associated heterodimer T-cell receptor, have been recognized on these cells so far. The possibility exists that the CD3- cytotoxic effectors recognize their targets through non-specific adhesion mechanisms. The goal of this study was: (a) to examine the correlation between binding properties and susceptibility to lysis of 6 informative target cell lines; (b) to evaluate the role, as ligands on these targets, of adhesion molecules such as LFA-1, LFA-3 and ICAM-1. The effectors used in this study were IL-2-activated LGL, predominantly CD3-, or highly purified CD3- lymphocytes from normal human donors. The 6 target lines studied included 2 pairs of EBV-transformed B-cell lines (721 LCL vs. 721.134, and MM vs. MM-10F2) in which the parental lines were resistant to lysis while HLA variants were susceptible. A third pair was the Daudi Burkitt cell line, susceptible to LAK lysis, and an HLA-positive transfected Daudi line which was more resistant to lysis. The binding properties of these targets to LAK effectors (conjugate formation) were evaluated using a sensitive double fluorescence flow cytometry method. In each pair examined, the susceptible targets formed more conjugates and were surrounded by more cytotoxic LAK effectors than their resistant counterparts, indicating that the conjugation properties of targets are closely correlated with their susceptibility to LAK lysis. The expression of adhesion molecules on the informative targets was examined by indirect immunofluorescence and their role was evaluated by inhibition of lysis after pre-coating the targets with the relevant antibodies. The differences in the expression of the classical cell-cell adhesion molecules LFA-1, LFA-3 and ICAM-1 on the target surfaces were only marginal, insufficient to explain the striking differences in susceptibility to lysis and in binding properties. Coating the target cells with antibodies directed against these adhesion determinants had no effects on the lysis of susceptible target cells. The same antibodies reacting with the LAK effectors did inhibit lysis. Taken together, these results suggest that, on the targets, presently undefined membrane adhesion structures may have a major role in conjugate formation between target and CD3- effectors and determine the susceptibility of the targets to lysis.