 OBJECTIVE: To summarize the histological and clinical characteristics of 40 cases with Burkitt's and Burkitt-like lymphoma in children, to evaluate the effects of treatment with international regimen, and to explore the treatment-related complications and prognostic factors. METHODS: Forty patients with Burkitt's and Burkitt-like lymphoma were registered in Beijing Children Hospital from Feb 2003 to Apr 2006. The diagnosis was confirmed by histology and immunohistochemistry of biopsy, and clinical staging by the examination of imaging, cerebrospinal fluid and bone marrow based on St. Jude system. Intensive, short-term chemotherapy witch was modified from LMB89 protocol was given to the patients. RESULTS: Of the 40 patients, 30 were diagnosed as Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) and 10 as Burkitt-like lymphoma (BLL). Antibody against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV-Ab) was positive in 19 cases at diagnosis, only 7 of the patients were positive for EBER. Thirty-three of the cases were male and 7 female (M:F = 4.7:1); the median age was 6 years 9 months. The most frequently seen clinical characteristics were abdominal masses and surgical abdomen. Nine cases were at stage I - II and 31 cases at stage III - IV at diagnosis; CNS was involved in 4 cases and bone marrow in 2 cases. The courses of treatment were approximately 2 - 8 months. All the patients were followed up, the median follow-up period was 22.6 months. After chemotherapy, 35 patients (88.7%) were still alive during the one-year follow-up. The 3-year event-free survival (EFS) rate was 81.8%. Major toxicity was myelosuppression and mucositis. Stage III to IV of myelosuppression occurred in the most patients with unresected tumor and CNS-involvement. Of 5 patients who died, 2 died of infection, 2 died of lymphoma progression during chemotherapy, and 1 died of relapse. CONCLUSION: Burkitt's and Burkitt-like lymphoma are the most common NHL in children with rapid clinical process. Outcome was greatly improved by current intensive, short-term chemotherapy regimen, the 3-year EFS was 81.8% including the patients who were in advanced stage. Childhood lymphoma with short clinical history, stage IV and residual disease after 3 months of therapy are associated with poor prognosis.