 OBJECTIVE: To study the diagnostic accuracy of hematolymphoid malignancy by using effusion fluid cytology specimens and to evaluate the values of immunocytochemistry for this assay. METHODS: The cytospin preparations/smears and cell block sections of effusion cytology specimens from 33 cases of hematolymphoid malignancy were retrospectively reviewed. Immunocytochemical study was performed. In selected cases, in-situ hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA and immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor gene rearrangement study were carried out as indicated. RESULTS: There were 33 cases of hematolymphoid malignancy, including 12 cases of T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, 16 cases of mature B cell neoplasm (including 9 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, 2 cases of Burkitt lymphoma, 2 cases of plasmacytoma/multiple myeloma, 2 cases of B-small lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma and 1 case of mantle cell lymphoma), 3 cases of mature T or NK-cell neoplasm (including 1 case of extranodal nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma, 1 case of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and 1 case of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia), 1 case of myeloid sarcoma and 1 case of mast cell sarcoma. Amongst the 33 cases studied, 16 represented disease relapses, including 8 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, 2 cases of plasmacytoma/multiple myeloma, 2 cases of B-small lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma, 1 case of T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, 1 case of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, 1 case of mantle cell lymphoma and 1 case of mast cell sarcoma. The remaining 17 cases showed serous effusion as the primary manifestation, with the diagnosis primarily made upon cytologic examination. The cytologic findings seen in all the 33 cases studied were in agreement with the corresponding histologic diagnosis. CONCLUSIONS: Diagnosis of hematolymphoid malignancy by effusion fluid cytology specimens is possible, especially when coupled with the clinical history, immunophenotype, in-situ hybridization and gene rearrangement study findings. This is especially so for cases with disease relapses.