Aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), including primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, lymphoblastic lymphoma and non-endemic Burkitt's lymphoma have been recognized as AIDS-defining cancers in most developed countries. However, HIV/AIDS epidemics appear not to have been associated with higher incidence of lymphomas in Africa. We therefore carried out this study to highlight the significance or otherwise of HIV/AIDS epidemics in the pathogenesis of lymphomas in a population of Nigerians with the disease. Since January 1993 to the present, all patients with haematologic cancers are routinely screened (following appropriate counseling) for HIV infection. Patients with a histological diagnosis of malignant chronic lymphoproliferative diseases {non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL)} at the Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals' Complex, Ile-Ife from January 1993 to August 2008 were noted. Those patients confirmed to be HIV/AIDS positive among the cohort with lymphomas were retrospectively studied using their clinical case notes. Data obtained were analyzed using appropriate descriptive and inferential statistics. A total of 391 patients were histologically confirmed to have lymphoma {NHL-109, (27.9%); CLL-76, (19.4%); BL-178, (45.5%) and HL-28, (7.2%)} during the study period. Nine patients (2.3%) were confirmed to be HIV- positive, all within the age bracket 24-60 (median = 50) years. Six of these, five males and one female, ages 24-60 (median = 37.5) years, had NHL while another three, all females (age 50 - 68 years; median = 56 years) had CLL. None of the patients with HL and BL were HIV positive. Patients with NHL presented at advanced stage of the disease (at least clinical stage IIIb), and all those with CLL presented at stage C of the International Working Party Classification. All the HIV-positive patients with NHL succumbed to the disease within one to three weeks of admission into the hospital. The prevalence of AIDS-related lymphomas is 2.3% compared to 4.4% found in the general population. However, it is interesting that no single case of AIDS-associated BL was seen, despite the fact that Burkitt's lymphoma is endemic in this part of the world. All the patients presented at a very advanced stage of the disease with significantly shortened survival.