Primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas (PCLBCL) have historically been a matter of debate in the literature. The 2005 World Health Organization-European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (WHO-EORTC) classification scheme segregated cutaneous B-cell lymphomas into 3 groups: primary cutaneous marginal zone B-cell lymphoma, primary cutaneous follicle center cell lymphoma, and primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (PCDLBCL), "leg type" (PCDLBCL-LT). Additionally, the WHO-EORTC classification scheme utilized the term PCLBCL "other" not otherwise specified (NOS) type for rare cases of PCLBCL not belonging to either the "leg type" or the primary cutaneous follicle center cell lymphoma group. In this study, we retrospectively assessed the histomorphologic features of 79 cases of PCDLBCLs, including those of "leg type" and "other" NOS type, to further categorize the histologic spectrum of these unusual cutaneous neoplasms. The histologic diagnosis of PCLBCL usually poses little diagnostic difficulty; however, some cases may adopt unusual or unfamiliar appearances mimicking other lymphoproliferative disorders or other malignant neoplasms. Seventy-nine cases, occurring in 37 men and 42 women, aged 34-94 years, were analyzed. Fifty-three cases were classified as "leg type" and 26 cases were classified as "other" NOS type using the WHO-EORTC classification. Of the 53 cases classified as "leg type," 33 were women and 20 were men; of the 26 cases of "other" NOS type, 9 were women and 17 were men. In the "leg type" category, 31 cases were located on the lower extremities, 5 cases on the face, 5 cases on the arm, 3 cases on the chest, 2 cases on the shoulder, 2 cases on the back, 1 case on the trunk, 1 case on the buttock, 1 case on the supraclavicular area, 1 case on the head, and 1 case on the flank. Of the "other" NOS type category, 8 cases were located on the face, 5 cases on the shoulder, 3 cases on the head, 2 cases on the abdomen, 2 cases on the chest, 1 case on the trunk, 1 on the vulva, 1 on the axilla, 1 on the back, 1 on the neck, and 1 on the hip. Most cases assessed showed the classic morphologic appearance of PCDLBCL, but cases mimicking Burkitt lymphoma (starry-sky pattern), natural killer-cell (NK) lymphoma, mycosis fungoides (epidermotropism), low-grade B-cell lymphomas, epithelial malignancies, and Merkel cell carcinoma were encountered in this series. The high frequency of these rare histologic patterns can be explained by a bias associated with consultation practice. Careful histologic examination and immunohistochemical stains were used to establish the correct diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of PCDLBCL is broad and difficult to define histologically. Knowledge of these rare histologic variants is necessary to avoid misinterpretation of these cases as nonlymphoid malignancies.