 OBJECTIVE: To investigate risk factors associated with acute tumor lysis syndrome (ATLS) in children with B-cell lymphoma and to explore feasible means for the prophylaxis and treatment. METHOD: Data from 18 children with ATLS in B-cell lymphoma were collected to assess their tumor burden at diagnosis and before chemotherapy. Evaluation was performed at the 8th day, 3 month, and the end of chemotherapy and follow up. The incidence of ATLS in B-cell lymphoma, and the relationship between the incidence of ATLS and whether the kidney was involved and large tumor burden were analyzed respectively. All patients received hydration, alkalinization and received allopurinol routinely. Urate oxidase and hemodialysis treatment were administered in some cases. RESULT: Of the 103 children with B-cell lymphoma, 18 were diagnosed as having ATLS (17.5%). All the 18 cases with ATLS were histopathologically confirmed as having Burkitt's lymphoma. All the patients were at stage III or IV and all had large tumor sizes, and 7 were found to have blasts in the bone marrow>25% (38.9%). Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels≥1000 U/L were found in 11 (61.1%) cases. All patients had developed metabolic abnormalities, including hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and uremia. In terms of clinical features and prognosis, all cases had nausea, vomiting, anorexia, oliguria, and anuria at different levels. One had gastrointestinal bleeding, 7 patients experienced seizures. The etiology in five was hypocalcemia and two had reversible posterior encephalopathy syndrome and all responded well to treatment. Nine cases of ATLS responded to supportive care, 4 required hemodialysis, and the other 4 responded to urate oxidase. Ten cases survived and 8 died. The major cause of death was severe complications and treatment was given up in 5 cases and recurrence occurred in 3 cases. CONCLUSION: ATLS was commonly seen in Burkitt's subtype of B-cell lymphoma. Higher LDH and large tumor sizes and kidney involvement were important risk factors for the development of ATLS in children with B-cell lymphoma. Treatments with hydration, alkalinization and allopurinol were safe and effective. Urate oxidase and hemodialytic treatments should be given timely.