The P3HR-1 Burkitt lymphoma line carries the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome and a small proportion of the cells (1-3%) enter the lytic cycle spontaneously. Treatment with TPA and n-butyrate elevates considerably the number of virus-producing cells (25-35%). Cells which enter the lytic cycle express the EBV early antigen EA, the viral capsid antigen VCA, and the membrane antigen MA. Antibodies against these antigens are present in EBV-immune human sera. The expression of virus envelope protein on the plasma membrane renders the cells sensitive to immune effector mechanisms. These were shown to be initiated by the alternative complement pathway (ACP)-activating capacity of the cells and by their reactivity with antibodies directed to the MA. When incubated with EBV-immune or nonimmune human serum, the induced (P3HR-1-V) cells activated C3 through ACP and fixed the generated C3 fragments. The efficiency of opsonization was higher in immune serum. By varying the experimental conditions we showed the damage of the induced cells by the complement system and by blood lymphocytes, and analysed the involvement of antibodies and the activated C3 fragments in the lymphocyte-mediated lysis. P3HR-1-V cells were lysed by immune serum and also by nonimmune serum though with lower efficiency. The induced cells had elevated sensitivity to the NK effect which was potentiated if the conditions allowed their opsonization. In the presence of antibodies the lymphocyte-mediated lysis was considerably higher and the ADCC mechanism was also potentiated by opsonization. These experiments suggest that B cells which enter the virus-producing cycle may be eliminated in EBV nonimmune host by NK cells. After the antibody response against the virus develops, the attack on these cells is more efficient through complement and lymphocyte-mediated antibody-dependent mechanisms. These effector mechanisms are enhanced by opsonization which is the consequence of the C3-activating capacity of the cells. The multiple ways of the immune attack on the B cells prepared to produce EBV may explain the absence of EA and VCA positive B cells in tumor cell populations and during the acute phase of infectious mononucleosis.