In the present study, we have investigated the ability of human T cells to secrete IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma. IL-4 and IFN-gamma were quantified with enzymatic immunoassays and IL-2 with a biologic assay by using the murine IL-2-dependent cell line CTLL-2. PBL, stimulated with Con A or with a combination of the phorbol ester 13-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-12-acetate and the Ca2+ ionophore A23187 secreted IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma. The kinetics of the secretion of the three lymphokines was investigated with two CD4+ clones; one (GEO-2) that produced IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma and another (HY640), that produced only IL-2 and IFN-gamma. Significant IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma production was observed after only 8 h of activation. Maximal levels of IL-2 and IL-4 were found 20 h after the onset of the stimulation which subsequently decreased. In contrast, IFN-gamma levels continued to increase in a period up to 40 h and then leveled off. In spite of these differences in secretion, the kinetics of accumulation of mRNA did not differ. The IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma mRNA were detectable 2 h after stimulation and continued to accumulate for a period up to 20 h. In a series of 22 CD4+ clones, 21 were able to secrete all three lymphokines upon stimulation. Almost all CD8+ clones were able to produce IL-2 and IFN-gamma, but only six of the 23 CD8+ T cell clones secreted IL-4. In addition, five CD4+ (allo)antigen-specific T cell clones were tested for IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma secretion upon specific stimulation. Two alloantigen-specific and two tetanus toxoid-specific T cell clones secreted IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma simultaneously, whereas one alloantigen-specific T cell clone secreted IL-2 and IFN-gamma, but not IL-4. A supernatant of the CD4+ T cell clone GEO-2, that contained high levels of IFN-gamma and IL-4, was unable to induce the low affinity receptor for IgE, CD23, on a Burkitt lymphoma cell line. However, after separation of IL-4 from IFN-gamma by using HPLC, the IL-4-containing fraction-induced CD23, which could be blocked by the fraction that contained IFN-gamma and by a polyclonal rabbit anti-IL-4 antiserum. Finally, the partly purified IL-4, that was devoid of IL-2, promoted the growth of the clone GEO-2.