The isoenzyme patterns of carboxylic esterase (E.C. 3.1.1.1) were studied in 74 proven human leukemia-lymphoma and 12 normal B-lymphoblastoid cell lines. These cell lines have been extensively phenotyped using poly- and monoclonal antibodies. Esterase isoenzymes were separated by isoelectric focusing and visualized by histo-cytochemical techniques. No leukemia-specific or (except for monocytes) blood cell type-specific isoenzyme or isoenzyme pattern could be detected. The monocytic element in some cell lines was characterized by a strong isoenzyme band which could be selectively and completely inhibited by sodium fluoride. The enzyme phenotypes were stably expressed in all subcultures of a given cell line and did not appear to have any cell cycle dependency. The leukemia-lymphoma cell lines have been subclassified into four major groups according to immunological parameters: T-cell, B-cell, myelomonocytic and non-T, non-B-cell. On the basis of immunological data the T-cell lines were assigned to five stages of differentiation. The number and staining intensity of the isoenzymes increased with differentiation of the T-cells paralleling the expression of immunological markers. The B-cell leukemia-lymphoma cell lines were divided into pre B-, B-, Burkitt lymphoma, multiple myeloma and hairy cell leukemia cell lines. Substantial variability among the isoenzyme patterns was detected ranging from immature profiles of pre B-cell lines to complete isoenzyme repertoires of multiple myeloma cell lines. No significant difference was seen between the isoenzymes of mature B-cell lines and normal B-lymphoblastoid cell lines. The most prominent feature seen in myelomonocytic cell lines was the monocytic band indicating a monocytic origin and separating the 'monocytoid' from the 'pure myeloid' cell lines. Considerable heterogeneity in the isoenzyme patterns was observed in the non-T, non-B cell groups which comprised erythroleukemia cell lines and cell lines arrested at a very early stage of lymphoid differentiation. These latter cell lines together with some T- and B-cell lines shared the common characteristics of positivity for cALLA, TdT and Ia antigens and an immature, incomplete isoenzyme profile. The results support the notions of maturation arrest and normal gene expression in leukemic cell populations. Furthermore, the importance of biochemical studies as part of the multiple marker analysis could be demonstrated.