This study addressed the possible relationship between B-cell maturation stage of Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cell lines and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) status, ethnic group, or type of chromosome translocation. Fifty-seven cell lines obtained at the International Agency for Research on Cancer from 51 patients were studied. Cytogenetic analyses of 54 cells lines were available. Cell size, surface immunoglobulins (sIgs), cytoplasmic immunoglobulins (cIgs), mouse red blood cell receptors, and reactivity with various monoclonal antibodies were assessed. Immunoglobulin (Ig) class secretions were measured in the supernatant of 2- and 5-day cultures from 33 cell lines, with the use of a sensitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay technique. From this study, BL appears to cover a broad range of the B-cell differentiation sequence, since the following Ig phenotypes were observed: null cells (sIg-, cIg-), large pre-B-cells (intracytoplasmic mu-chains), small B-cells (sIg+, cIg-), and various types of secreting B-cells (sIg+, cIg+). Among the latter, various patterns of cIg could be defined (perinuclear, paranuclear, and vesicular). B-cell maturation stages were correlated with the amount of secreted Ig. In sIg+ cell lines, different classes of Ig were found: 35 IgM, 10 IgM plus IgD, 4 IgG, and 1 IgA. None of the different monoclonal antibodies used was specific to a precise stage of maturation. The stages of maturation were correlated with neither the type of chromosome translocations of BL nor the presence of EBV genome, but the most immature cell lines were all EBV positive and most of them originated from African patients. In contrast with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, the common acute lymphocytic leukemia antigen (CD10) was expressed on nearly all BL cell lines of intermediate maturation stages but only on half of the pre-B ones. In addition, none of the cell lines tested was found to react with CD5 antibodies, which recognize most of the chronic lymphocytic leukemia of the same stage of maturation as that in the B-lymphocyte lineage.