An immunoconjugate was prepared containing a disulfide linker between a murine monoclonal antibody (5E9), which recognized the human transferrin receptor, and the ribosome-inactivating protein gelonin. This immunoconjugate was found to consist of two major species, 5E9-gelonin2 and 5E9-gelonin1, and a minor species of 5E9-gelonin3 and less than 10% of either free antibody or gelonin. 5E9-gelonin was extremely toxic in vitro to human tumor cell lines expressing the 5E9 antigen, including a Burkitt's lymphoma, an adult T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia, an acute myelogenous leukemia, a promyelocytic leukemia, and a cervical carcinoma line. A 24-hour exposure to 10(-9) M immunoconjugate killed 90-99.9% of tumor cells, depending on the cell line. A 5E9-negative murine leukemia was not sensitive to this conjugate. Pharmacokinetic analysis of the disappearance of this immunoconjugate from the murine circulation revealed that it had a biphasic clearance, with an initial rapid phase with a half-life (t1/2) of 3 hours and a later, slower phase with a t1/2 of about 1 day. Analysis of blood samples by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis revealed that a substantial degree of disulfide-linker breakdown occurred in vivo and that the 5E9-gelonin2 species was cleared more rapidly than the 5E9-gelonin1. With use of the same clonogenic assays used to measure in vitro toxicity, biologically active immunoconjugate could be detected in murine plasma for up to 24 hours after iv administration, but the concentration of immunoconjugate by this measure was considerably less than that predicted by SDS-gel electrophoresis. The ability to deliver immunoconjugate to tumor cells in vivo was studied with use of the Burkitt's lymphoma Namalwa as a xenograft in nude mice. It was possible to deliver substantial amounts of immunoconjugate to Namalwa cells in xenografted ascites with direct ip inoculation; lower but significant amounts of immunoconjugate could be delivered to this xenograft after systemic iv administration, provided the tumor burden was low. The 5E9-gelonin conjugate, when administered iv at the time of ip tumor inoculation, prolonged survival of nude mice bearing Namalwa or other human tumors as ascites xenografts and delayed or prevented the growth of subcutaneous nodules of Namalwa in an antigen-specific fashion after a single iv injection. Direct intratumoral administration also inhibited the growth of visible subcutaneous nodules of Namalwa. This immunoconjugate may be useful in the treatment of human cancer.