The anabolism of pyrimidine ribo- and deoxyribonucleosides from uracil and thymine was investigated in phytohemagglutinin-stimulated human peripheral blood lymphocytes and in a Burkitt's lymphoma-derived cell line (Raji). We studied the ability of these cells to synthesize pyrimidine nucleosides by ribo- and deoxyribosyl transfer between pyrimidine bases or nucleosides and the purine nucleosides inosine and deoxyinosine as donors of ribose 1-phosphate and deoxyribose 1-phosphate, respectively: these reactions involve the activities of purine-nucleoside phosphorylase, and of the two pyrimidine-nucleoside phosphorylases (uridine phosphorylase and thymidine phosphorylase). The ability of the cells to synthesize uridine was estimated from their ability to grow on uridine precursors in the presence of an inhibitor of pyrimidine de novo synthesis (pyrazofurin). Their ability to synthesize thymidine and deoxyuridine was estimated from the inhibition of the incorporation of radiolabelled thymidine in cells cultured in the presence of unlabelled precursors. In addition to these studies on intact cells, we determined the activities of purine- and pyrimidine-nucleoside phosphorylases in cell extracts. Our results show that Raji cells efficiently metabolize preformed uridine, deoxyuridine and thymidine, are unable to salvage pyrimidine bases, and possess a low uridine phosphorylase activity and markedly decreased (about 1% of peripheral blood lymphocytes) thymidine phosphorylase activity. Lymphocytes have higher pyrimidine-nucleoside phosphorylases activities, they can synthesize deoxyuridine and thymidine from bases, but at high an non-physiological concentrations of precursors. Neither type of cell is able to salvage uracil into uridine. These results suggest that pyrimidine-nucleoside phosphorylases have a catabolic, rather than an anabolic, role in human lymphoid cells. The facts that, compared to peripheral blood lymphocytes, lymphoblasts possess decreased pyrimidine-nucleoside phosphorylases activities, and, on the other hand, more efficiently salvage pyrimidine nucleosides, are consistent with a greater need of these rapidly proliferating cells for pyrimidine nucleotides.