Cytogenetic studies were performed on 25 samples obtained from 25 patients with lymphoma. Fourteen of these were also simultaneously studied with nucleic acid flow cytometry to determine percent S-phase and DNA content (ploidy). In 17 cases (68%), evaluable metaphases were obtained. The evaluable metaphase rate was higher in previously untreated patients (15/19 or 79%). All but two cases showed abnormal karyotype. All five cases showing either the t(8;14) or t(8;22) abnormality were associated with extremely high percent S-phase values, ranging from 36% to 47%, which is in the range of high-grade lymphomas according to our previous experience. Four of these cases were diagnosed as Burkitt's lymphoma and one as diffuse large cell lymphoma. Further review of this latter case resulted in the pathologic diagnosis being changed to Burkitt's lymphoma. Three patients had either numerical or structural abnormalities of chromosome #21 [two cases of extra chromosomes and one i(21q)]. All three cases were diagnosed as diffuse large cell lymphoma. Four instances of trisomy 12 were identified. Only one of these was diagnosed as diffuse well-differentiated lymphocytic lymphoma. The remaining three were Burkitt's lymphoma in two and diffuse large cell lymphoma in one. Two instances of t(14;18) were observed. This is the characteristic abnormality of follicular lymphomas. One of these cases was a follicular large cell lymphoma. The second case had possibly originated from a follicular mixed lymphoma and had evolved into a diffuse mixed cell type. Both of these cases had low S-phase values in the range of low-grade lymphomas. The correlation between ploidy as determined by flow cytometry and cytogenetic analysis was good whenever the DNA index was elevated. However, when the DNA index was 1.0 (diploid), concordant measurements were observed in only five of eight cases. Flow cytometry detected one instance of clearly abnormal ploidy, which was thought to be diploid by cytogenetics. This case most likely represents a "false negative" cytogenetic determination.