Raji cells were described to carry receptors for iC3b, C3d, C3b-beta 1 H and beta 1 H. Controversial opinions, however, exist whether or not these cells carry also receptors for C3b. Using highly purified C3, definitely devoid of beta 1 H and C5, for preparation of C3b intermediates, it could be shown that Raji cells bound to C3b cells. Furthermore, Raji cells reacted with monoclonal antibodies that interfered with binding of C3b to human erythrocytes, lymphocytes and renal cells. The receptor for C3b on Raji cell, however, exhibited some special properties and, therefore, required some distinct experimental conditions for its detection: (1) The origin of the erythrocytes used for preparation of the C3b intermediates seemed to be important; this was not the case when iC3b and C3d receptor reactivity was assessed. (2) Rosettes already formed between Raji cells and EAC1423b showed the tendency to disintegrate within the first 30 min after the rosette formation assay. Again, this effect could not be observed with iC3b- and C3d-dependent rosette formation. (3) Incubation of the Raji cells at 37 degrees C as well as 4 degrees C before rosette formation resulted in a rhythmic loss and reappearance of C3b receptor reactivity. At room temperature (19-22 degrees C) this effect was much less expressed. There was no influence of preincubation at 4 and 37 degrees C, respectively, on the iC3b and C3d receptor reactivity of Raji cells. (4) Diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP) present during rosette formation enhanced, within a certain range of concentration, the percentage of C3b-dependent rosette formation. iC3b and C3d receptor reactivity was not influenced. A similar reaction pattern was observed with pokeweed mitogen (PWM)-stimulated tonsil lymphocytes. In the concentrations tested, DFP showed no effect on the rosette formation between C3b, iC3b, and C3d cells, respectively, and unstimulated tonsil lymphocytes. The data presented suggest that C3b receptors on Raji cells undergo some special metabolism, possibly controlled by fluid phase or cell-bound proteases. This might be a common property of C3b receptors on blast-like and transformed cells, differing from that of unstimulated small lymphocytes.