Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) originating from Burkitt's lymphoma (P3HR-1 and CC34-5), nasopharyngeal carcinoma (M-ABA), transfusion mononucleosis (B95-8), and a patient with acute myeloblastic leukemia (QIMR-WIL) was isolated from virus-carrying lymphoid cell lines after induction with the tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Viral DNA was analyzed by partial denaturation mapping and by use of the restriction endonucleases EcoRI, HindIII, and SalI and separation of fragments in 0.4% agarose. By using the restriction enzyme data of B95-8 (EBV) and W91 (EBV) obtained by Given and Kieff (D. Given and E. Kieff, J. Virol. 28:524-542, 1978), maps were established for the other virus strains. Comigrating fragments were assumed to be identical or closely related among the different strains. Fragments of different strains migrating differently were isolated, purified, radioactively labeled, and mapped by hybridization against blots of separated viral fragments. The results were as follows. (i) All strains studied were closely related. (ii) The number of internal repeats was variable among and within viral strains. (iii) B95-8 (EBV) was the only strain with a large deletion of about 12,000 base pairs at the right-hand side of the molecule. At the same site, small deletions of about 400 to 500 base pairs were observed in P3HR-1 (EBV) and M-ABA (EBV) DNA. (iv) P3HR-1 (EBV), the only nontransforming EBV strain, had a deletion of about 3,000 to 4,000 base pairs in the long unique region adjacent to the internal repeats carrying a HindIII site. (v) Small inserted sequences of 150 to 400 base pairs were observed in M-ABA (EBV) and B95-8 (EBV) at identical sites in the middle of the long unique region. (vi) Near this site, an insertion of about 1,000 base pairs was found in P3HR-1 (EBV) DNA. (vii) The cleavage patterns of P3HR-1 virus DNA and the results of blot hybridizations with P3HR-1 virus fragments are not conclusive and point to the possibility that in addition to the normal cleavage pattern some viral sequences may be arranged differently. Even though it is possible that small differences in the genome organization may have significant biological effects, the great similarity among different EBV strains does not favor the hypothesis that disease-specific subtypes exist.