Complement receptor (CR) expression in cell lines derived from Burkitt's lymphoma (BL), Epstein Barr virus-transformed cord blood lymphocytes (CB), and peripheral lymphocytes from patients with infectious mononucleosis (IM) was examined. Red cell intermediates bearing various densities of C4b, C3b, C3bi, or C3d were tested for rosette formation with the cell lines. In addition, a series of studies was performed under conditions that precluded the cleavage of cellbound C3b by Factor I (C3bINA). These conditions did not alter rosetting by the cells that were tested. RAJI cells rosetted with EAC3bi greater than EAC3d greater than EAC3b, but not with EAC4b. EAC3b/RAJI rosette formation required much greater quantities of C3b bound to red cells than did CB and IM lines, which unlike RAJI, also bound EAC4b. All of the BL lines failed to bind EAC4b even at a C4b density of 50,000 molecules/cell, but several lines did form rosettes with EAC3b, and most formed rosettes with EAC3bi and EAC3d. Fluid phase C3b blocked RAJI/EAC3b rosetting while having little effect on RAJI/EAC3bi rosette activity. Moreover, fluid phase C3b, as well as C4b, blocked RAJI/EAC3b rosettes more effectively than CB/EAC3b rosettes. The results indicate that the RAJI cell line has a receptor for C3b, with characteristics that differ markedly from the C3b receptor of cell lines derived from CB lymphocytes and of lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from patients with IM. This receptor is capable of interacting with soluble but not cellbound C4b. In these studies, rosette formation was examined under various ionic conditions. RAJI/EAC3b rosette formation was severely reduced as ionic strength was increased, whereas RAJI/EAC3bi binding was only moderately decreased at physiologic ionic strength. In striking contrast, EAC3bi binding to monocytes, PMN, and human erythrocytes was markedly reduced as ionic strength increased, but EAC3b binding to these cells was less sensitive to changes in ionic strength. Under conditions of physiologic ionic strength, the C3bi receptor of phagocytic cells may be at a functional disadvantage in the binding of C3bi-coated particles. This may have major physiologic implications.