Studies reported earlier [ Joshi et al. (1982) J. Biol. Chem. 257, 13884-13887] have indicated that human interferon-alpha 2 (HuIFN-alpha 2) binds to a specific macromolecular receptor on human cells as identified by cross-linking with bifunctional cross-linking reagents and analysis by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. We have carried out experiments to investigate the fate of the interferon-receptor complex on the cell surface under conditions which lead to cellular response. As analyzed by cross-linking and gel electrophoresis, the interferon-receptor complex, formed on incubation with 125I-IFN-alpha 2 at 4 degrees C, persisted at the cell surface for several hours at 4 degrees C; however, if the cells were switched to 37 degrees C, there was a rapid decline in the complex, apparently due to a loss of the interferon receptors from the cell surface. This was associated with an internalization of the 125I-interferon as indicated by the fact that, on incubation at 37 degrees C, an appreciable fraction of the cell-associated interferon (approximately equal to 50%) became resistant to trypsin digestion, or dissociation on incubation in growth medium or low-pH buffer. A large fraction of the trypsin-resistant (internalized) 125I-labeled material migrated as intact interferon in polyacrylamide gels, and it was immunoprecipitated by anti-(HuIFN-alpha)antibodies but not by anti-(HuIFN-beta)antibodies. The bulk of the internalized 125I-interferon was recovered in a particulate fraction and, on cross-linking with disuccinimidyl suberate, a 150000-Mr complex could be detected. The results suggest that interferon may be internalized as a complex with the receptor, which may account for the loss of the interferon-receptors on the cell surface. This modulation of the IFN-alpha/beta receptors was induced by HuIFN-alpha and HuIFN-beta but not by HuIFN-gamma. The recovery of the IFN-alpha/beta receptors, lost upon incubation with HuIFN-alpha, took several hours and required protein synthesis. The significance of the results is discussed.