The CD30 antigen was originally described as a specific surface marker for Hodgkin's lymphoma. Recent work established CD30 as a member of the tumor necrosis factor/nerve growth factor receptor superfamily whose ligand (CD30L) has also been cloned and expressed; CD30L is active as membrane-bound type II glycoprotein. Here, CD30L mRNA expression was studied in a panel of 102 continuous human leukemia-lymphoma cell lines and was found only in four Burkitt lymphoma, one Burkit-type acute lymphoblastic leukemia and one non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) cell line. The product of CD30L mRNA is expressed as a membrane protein on the surface of these malignant B-cell lines. Treatment of these cell lines with soluble CD27L, phorbol ester or staphylococcus aureus Cowan antigen resulted in the enhancement of cell surface CD30L protein expression. CD30L mRNA was not detected in normal unstimulated peripheral blood (PB) monocytes, monocyte-derived macrophages, or T-cells, but was detected in primary granulocytes; exposure to activating reagents induced and upregulated CD30L transcription in these different PB populations. While CD40 and CD30L surface protein expression on PB monocytes could be enhanced or induced by treatment with gamma-interferon, these cells remained negative for CD30, both at the mRNA and at the protein level. Similarly, PB monocyte-derived macrophages and granulocytes remained negative for CD30 mRNA and protein expression, regardless of stimulation. Only activated T-cells expressed CD30 mRNA and surface protein. CD30L-transfected cells and cells constitutively expressing CD30L delivered a similar stimulus for proliferation of the CD30+ Hodgkin's disease (HD)-derived cell line HDLM-2, but inhibited proliferation of the CD30+ large cell anaplastic lymphoma cell line KARPAS-299. These data provide strong evidence for the involvement in growth regulation of recombinant and natural CD30L through its interaction with the CD30 receptor. Collectively, these data suggest that the CD30L-CD30 interaction has potent biological activity and might play a critical role in the immune response and pathogenesis of HD and some NHL, in particular Burkitt lymphomas.