Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transforms resting B cells in vitro very efficiently. The nuclear viral protein EBV nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2) is absolutely required for this process and also acts as a transcriptional activator of cellular and viral genes. As shown previously, EBNA2 transactivates the promoters of the viral latent membrane proteins. It interacts indirectly with an EBNA2-responsive cis element of the terminal protein 1 (TP1) promoter. To identify the sequences mediating EBNA2 transactivation of the bidirectional promoter region driving expression of the latent membrane proteins LMP and TP2 in opposite directions, we assayed the effects of EBNA2 on the activities of promoter deletion and site-directed mutants of TP2 and LMP promoter luciferase reporter gene constructs by cotransfections into EBNA2-negative Burkitt's lymphoma cells. We were able to delineate an 80-bp EBNA2-responsive region (EBNA2RE) between -232 and -152 relative to the LMP RNA start site which could also mediate EBNA2-dependent activation on a heterologous promoter. Sequences of 20 and 32 bp located at the 5' and 3' ends, respectively, of the EBNA2RE were both essential for EBNA2 responsiveness. Full transactivation of the LMP and TP2 promoters seemed to require 20 bp of 5' adjacent sequences in addition to the 80-bp element. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed specific protein-DNA complexes formed at the EBNA2RE. Oligonucleotides from -181 to -152 and -166 to -132 relative to the LMP RNA start site visualized one B-cell and one B-cell-plus-HL60-specific retarded protein-DNA complex, respectively. Additionally, an oligonucleotide from -253 to -210 revealed two specific protein-DNA complexes with nuclear extracts from different B and non-B cells, suggesting also the binding of ubiquitously expressed proteins on the EBNA2RE. Thus, these experiments defined a 80-bp cis element sufficient for conferring EBNA2 inducibility and demonstrated specific interactions of cellular proteins at DNA sequences within the EBNA2RE, which are critical for transactivation by EBNA2.