OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to describe and analyze the CT features of small-bowel lymphoma, compare those features with the radiographic presentation in immunocompetent patients and patients with AIDS, and discuss the role of CT in the initial detection and evaluation of this disease. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Abdominal CT examinations of 42 consecutive patients with proven small-bowel lymphoma were retrospectively reviewed. In 19 patients, small-bowel examinations were also available for review. The 42-patient study group was divided into two subgroups: 22 patients with AIDS and 20 immunocompetent patients. RESULTS: Primary small-bowel lymphoma was present in 37% of patients and was equally distributed between the two subgroups. The histologic types included non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in 33 patients, Burkitt's lymphoma in seven patients, Hodgkin's lymphoma in one patient, and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue-type lymphoma in one patient. Solid organ involvement (liver, splee, kidney, or adrenal glands) was detected in 22% of patients with AIDS and in 10% of the immunocompetent patients. We saw two main patterns of CT appearance. In the first pattern, single or multiple segments had circumferential wall thickening, homogeneous in attenuation, that ranged from 1.5 cm to 7 cm (mean, 2.6 cm) in 33 patients. In the second pattern, single or multiple cavitary lesions were revealed as nodular and grossly enlarged intestinal lumen with bowel wall thickening in 13 patients. A polypoid mass that was entirely intraluminal was seen in one patient. Heterogeneous areas of low attenuation were revealed in two intestinal tumors of HIV-positive patients. Mesenteric or retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy was seen in 45% of patients with AIDS and 60% of the immunocompetent patients. The gross morphologic features, distribution. pattern of CT presentation, degree of wall thickening, and length of involvement were all similar in the two subgroups. CONCLUSION: More than half (52%) of the individuals with small-bowel lymphoma diagnosed at our institution in the last 4 years were patients with AIDS. The features revealed by CT scans were characteristic or highly suggestive of small-bowel lymphoma. We saw no significant differences in the radiographic features of patients with AIDS and immunocompetent patients.