A human monoclonal antibody (mAb), designated mNKES, was generated by fusing B cells isolated from an enlarged cervical lymph node of a patient with a carotid body tumor (CBT), with human myeloma cell line KR-12 (6TG). The reactivity of mNKES was tested by the indirect immunofluorescence method. The antigen defined by mNKES was expressed on Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines Raji, Daudi, and Ramos and on B lymphoblastoid cell line IM-9. In addition, mNKES reacted with T cells stimulated with recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2) obtained from normal healthy donors. However, mNKES did not react with normal resting human T, B, or adherent cells (monocytes/macrophages). When the reactivity of mNKES and mouse mAbs recognizing the human adhesion-associated antigen (CD10, CD11a, CD11b, CD11c, CD14, CD16, CD18, CD23, CD28, CD29, CD31, CD43, CD44, CD45RA, CD50, CD54, CD58, CD80, CD102, CD106, and HLA class I, and HLA class II antigen) with various cell lines was compared, mNKES reactivity was found to be unique, not resembling that of any of these mouse mAbs. Interestingly, mNKES specifically and rapidly (within 2 hr) induced homotypic cell aggregation of IM-9 cells. This mNKES-induced cell aggregation was completely blocked by the addition of EDTA and when incubated at 4 degrees C. The mAbs reactive with CD11a/CD18 (leukocyte function-associated antigen-1; LFA-1) and CD54 (intercellular adhesion molecule-1; ICAM-1) completely blocked the IM-9 cell aggregation induced by mNKES, and induction of IM-9 cell aggregation by mNKES was significantly blocked in the presence of the protein kinase C inhibitors sphingosine and H-7 and completely blocked by cytochalasin B and cytochalasin D, which inhibit microfilament formation. Regarding biological function, IM-9 cells bearing surface IgG (sIgG) effectively promoted IgG-secreting activity underlying the homotypic cell aggregation induced by mNKES. The surface antigen recognized by mNKES has a molecular size of about 55 kDa, as determined by immunoblotting analysis. These findings indicate that mNKES recognizes a novel adhesion-associated antigen distinct from any previously reported adhesion-associated antigens in terms of pattern of cellular distribution and biological function and that mNKES is the first human mAb found that rapidly induces homotypic cell aggregation and effectively promotes the IgG-secreting activity of human B lymphoblastoid cell line IM-9.