We investigated the expression-percentage as well as MESF values ("molecules of equivalent soluble fluorochrom" that represent approximately the density of marker expression) of HLA-DR, CD71 and CD38 markers in some human leukemias (ALL, AML, CLL, CML) and lymphomas. They are non-lineage restricted and are supposed to be activation markers except for cases where they represent pathological phenotype like HLA-DR in pre B-ALL, CD38 in some M0 AML or in plasmocytoma or CD38 and CD71 in less mature T-ALL. We used flow cytometry, immunofluorescent staining, DNA staining by propidium iodide and quantification by calibration particles. We demonstrated increased MESF values of HLA-DR compared with controls in all investigated disorders, what could have a prognostic value. We demonstrated significantly higher MESF values of HLA-DR in cALL (37,300-46,000) in comparison with AML (9400-12,400), what could represent another important parameter when distinguishing between these two groups of leukemia. In cells of CML patients with lower CD38% and CD71% increased MESF values (5100 for CD38 and 7900 for CD71), were found while in some T-ALL, AML and cALL patients with high percentages of CD71 and CD38 there were lower MESF values what could indicate a possible connection of higher stage of cell maturation with increased density of CD38 and CD71 markers. We investigated possible relationship between percentage of expression of HLA-DR, CD38 and CD71 and proliferation rate by DNA analysis of the cell cycle. In a group of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients, there was no significant increase of proliferation index of malignant cells compared with control. The correlation between percentage of expression of mentioned parameters and proliferation index was not significant. In one patient with Burkitt's lymphoma we demonstrated significant increase of proliferation index of CD71+ subpopulation compared with CD71- one, what indicates that in aggressive form of NHL CD71 can be evaluated not only as activation but also as proliferation marker.