A variety of drugs have been used to treat B-lymphocyte neoplasms, including both cell cycle-specific (CCS) and non-cell-cycle-specific drugs. Although the therapy for such cancers is complex and can include both types of drugs, the efficacy of these drugs in inducing cell death remains unclear. In this paper we have concentrated on specific CCS drugs and have examined their ability to induce programmed cell death (apoptosis) in Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines derived from patients. The CCS drugs chosen were hydroxyurea and aphidicolin (active in late G1, early S phase), the topoisomerase poisons camptothecin and etoposide (S, early G2 phase) and vincristine and Taxol (late G2, M phase). These choices allow comparison of two drugs with differing modes of action for each of the various phases of the cell cycle. Our results indicate that the variation in apoptosis between drugs that act at the same phase of the cell cycle is negligible. Both S/G2 and G2/M blockers are very potent at inducing apoptosis whereas G1/S blockers are ineffective in the induction of apoptosis. In addition, marked kinetic variations in the rate of apoptosis induction were observed, etoposide and camptothecin being more rapid in their action than the other agents. The order of effectiveness in inducing apoptosis on a kinetic basis was S/G2 agents >> G2/M agents >> G1/S agents. In this study we have also found that growth inhibition was induced by all the CCS agents chosen and by anti-IgM in various Burkitt's lymphoma lines. Furthermore c-myc was down-regulated under similar conditions. Since apoptosis was only selectively induced by some of the CCS agents, it implies c-myc expression is associated with growth regulation and c-myc down-regulation is an insufficient condition for the induction of apoptosis. In addition, cotreatments using the CCS and other agents revealed the following: Cotreatment using two CCS drugs which act at the same stage in the cell cycle showed either no change or only additivity to the effects seen with either agent alone. However, cotreatment with CCS drugs showed that an inhibitory effect is found between G1/S and G2/M drugs or S/G2 and G2/M drugs. No effect was found between G1/S and S/G2 drugs. Anti-IgM, which by itself was capable of inducing apoptosis, was observed to augment apoptosis induced by very low concentrations of G2/M-acting drugs but it has little effect on G1/S or the S/G2 drugs. The inhibitory effect of anti-CD40 or TNF-alpha on anti-IgM-induced apoptosis did not carry over to an effect on apoptosis induction by the CCS agents. Thus specific combinations of agents may lead to either enhancement, inhibition, or no interactive effect on apoptosis.