In order to elucidate the possibility of costimulatory molecules-mediated immuno or immuno-gene therapy for human hematological malignancies, we analyzed 30 hematopoietic cell lines and cells obtained from 48 patients with hematological malignancies for the expression of costimulatory molecules such as CD80 and CD86. The 30 hematopoietic cell lines were composed of 4 cell lines derived from the patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), 3 from Philadelphia chromosome positive ALL (Ph1+ALL), 8 from acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML), 3 from acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), 8 from chronic myeloid leukemia at blast crisis (CML-BC), 3 from Burkitt's lymphoma and one from follicular cell lymphoma. The expression of CD80 or CD86 was frequent on cell lines derived from the patients with CML-BC or Burkitt's lymphoma, while it was rare on cell lines from T-ALL. Subsequently we analyzed the cells obtained from 48 patients with hematological malignancies, which consisted of 6 samples from patients with ALL, 30 from AML, 2 from CML-BC, 3 from B-cell lymphoma and one from each acute mixed leukemia (AMixL), adult T cell leukemia (ATL), T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia (T-LGL leukemia), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)-RAEB in T, multiple myeloma (MM) or T-cell lymphoma. Among all the 48 cases, all cases except one case with CLL and two with B cell lymphoma were demonstrated to be negative for CD80 on the neoplastic cells. CD86 and HLA-DR were shown to be expressed in 50% and 88% of total 48 cases respectively. In 30 AML samples, CD86 was positive in 15 cases (50%), which was sharply in contrast with the finding that CD80 was not detected in any AML samples. HLA-DR was expressed in 25 AML samples (83%). We also treated seven human hematopoietic cell lines with IFN-gamma, IL-12 or IL-15 and observed whether these cytokines could induce or enhance the expression of CD40, CD54, CD58 and HLA-DR as well as CD80 and CD86. The present study demonstrated that the expression of CD86 could be upregulated not only by IFN-gamma, but also by IL-12 or IL-15 in some cell lines. These findings suggested the possibility that the absence of CD80 on neoplastic cells may be associated with the lack of efficient anti-tumor immunity in most patients with hematological malignancies and that the immuno or immuno-gene therapy manipulating the expression of costimulatory molecules such as CD80 may be a useful treatment modality for hematological malignancies.