BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Dissection of the carotid artery can, in certain cases, lead to significant stenosis, occlusion, or pseudoaneurysm formation, with subsequent hemodynamic and embolic infarcts, despite anticoagulant therapy. We sought to determine the therapeutic value of stent-supported angioplasty retrospectively in this subset of patients who are poor candidates for medical therapy. METHODS: Five men and five women (age range, 37-83 years; mean age, 51.2 years) with dissection of the internal (n=9) and common (n=1) carotid artery were successfully treated with percutaneous endovascular balloon angioplasty and stent placement. The etiology was spontaneous in five, iatrogenic in three, and traumatic in two. Seven of the treated lesions were left-sided and three were right-sided. RESULTS: The treatment significantly improved dissection-related stenosis from 74+/-5.5% to 5.5+/-2.8%. Two occlusive dissections were successfully recanalized using microcatheter techniques during the acute phase. Multiple overlapping stents were needed in four patients to eliminate the inflow zone and false lumen and establish an angiographically smooth outline within the true lumen. There was one case of retroperitoneal hemorrhage, but there were no procedural transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), minor or major strokes, or deaths (0%). Clinical outcome at latest follow-up (16.5+/-1.9 months) showed significant improvements compared with pretreatment modified Rankin score (0.7+/-0.3 vs 1.8+/-0.44) and Barthel index (99.5+/-0.5 vs 80.5+/-8.9). One delayed stroke occurred in a treated patient with contralateral carotid occlusion following a hypotensive uterine hemorrhage at 8 months; the remaining nine patients have remained free of TIA or stroke. CONCLUSION: In select cases of carotid dissection associated with critical hemodynamic insufficiency or thromboembolic events that occur despite medical therapy, endovascular stent placement appears to be a safe and effective method of restoring vessel lumen integrity, with good clinical outcome.