BACKGROUND: Paneth cell metaplasia (PCM) is well described in adults but little is known about the distribution of colonic Paneth cells and the occurrence of PCM in a paediatric population. The aim of this study is to determine whether Paneth cell hyperplasia or metaplasia characteristically occurs in the colons of children with newly diagnosed idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed colonic series from 28 new diagnoses of paediatric IBD at a tertiary referral centre, and from a further 14 children with IBD-like symptoms whose colonic biopsies and ancillary investigations were normal. Paneth cells were counted at 6 anatomical sites in the colon, and at each site acute and chronic inflammation were assessed semi-quantitatively and the presence or absence of crypt architectural distortion and eosinophilia was documented. RESULTS: In control, ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) groups there was a gradient of decreasing Paneth cell numbers from caecum to rectum. Paneth cells were not seen in the distal colon in the control group, but they were present there in 11 of 13 patients with ulcerative colitis and 14 of 15 with Crohn's disease. Only patients with IBD showed Paneth cell hyperplasia, assessed as more than 10 Paneth cells per 10 well-oriented crypts at any site. There was a statistically significant increase in Paneth cells in the caecum, ascending, transverse and descending colon in UC and in the ascending, transverse, descending and sigmoid colon in CD compared with controls. There was no significant difference between UC and CD. There was no correlation between the site of PCM and acute or chronic inflammation, crypt distortion or eosinophilia. CONCLUSION: Paneth cells are found in the proximal but not the distal colon in otherwise normal paediatric colonic series. A high proportion of UC and CD patients show PCM in the distal colon. This is present early in the disease and does not correlate with histological features of chronicity.