INTRODUCTION: Visualisation of mucosa at ileocolonoscopy (IC) remains the gold standard in the assessment of mucosal healing (MH) in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). MH is evolving as a key endpoint in assessing response to therapy. This will invariably mean an increased endoscopic burden on these patients. We aimed to investigate IBD patients' perspectives on this, as well as their tolerance of IC. METHODS: Consecutive patients attending IBD clinic between September and December 2013 were questioned on their experience of IC. Data on sex, age, disease type (Crohn's (CD) or ulcerative colitis (UC)), duration of illness, and no. of IC was obtained. They were asked to grade various components of the IC experience (concerns about complications, bowel preparation, disruption to life, procedure discomfort, travel to hospital) on a standardised tolerance scale from 1-5. They were also asked to qualitatively rate their overall experience of IC (not unpleasant/neither unpleasant nor pleasant/bearable/unpleasant/very unpleasant). Finally, they were asked how often they would be prepared to undertake IC in the future. RESULTS: 98 patients responded (46% male). Mean age was 43.2 years. 33 had UC, 50 had CD, and 11 were unsure of diagnosis. Mean no. IC was 3.7. 62% had a disease duration >5 years, with only 4% diagnosed in the previous year. Mean tolerance scores for the group were: concerns about complications 2.6, bowel preparation 3.0, disruption to life 2.4, discomfort during procedure 3.0, travel to/from hospital 1.7. Comparisons between patient subgroups CD versus UC, age ≥55 years versus age <55 years, ≥4 IC versus <4 IC, and diagnosis ≥5 years versus diagnosis <5 years, revealed no significant differences in scores. However, comparison between sexes showed females were more worried about the procedure than males (3.0 vs. 2.1, p = 0.02), were less tolerant of bowel preparation (3.5 vs. 2.3, p < 0.001), experienced more disruption to their lives (2.9 vs. 1.9, p < 0.001) and were more troubled by travel concerns (2.0 vs. 1.4, p = 0.02). The majority of the patients felt IC was bearable (53%) with only 13% describing it as very unpleasant. 55% would have the procedure as frequently as required if their physician felt it appropriate. 7% would only have IC every 5 years. CONCLUSION: Bowel preparation and procedural discomfort are the most bothersome aspects of IC amongst IBD patients. There are clear differences in tolerance between female and male patients, and these results should prompt endoscopy units to find ways of improving patient acceptability. This could be provided in the form of a pre-test telephone consultation. A minority of patients were reluctant to increase their frequency of IC, which may be relevant in the monitoring of MH in their future management. DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST: None Declared.