Treatment of the craniofacial dysostoses (e.g., Crouzon, Apert, Pfeiffer, Saethre-Chotzen syndromes) is critically dependent on the successful advancement of the midface with a Le Fort III procedure. The purpose of this retrospective clinical outcome study was to evaluate a new technique for distracting the Le Fort III procedure and to compare its results in growing children with those of the standard Le Fort III osteotomy. The records of 22 children were reviewed; 10 patients (mean age, 6.5 years) underwent a standard Le Fort III procedure, and 12 patients (mean age, 7.5 years) underwent a Le Fort III distraction procedure. The distraction group included two separate techniques, bilateral buried distraction (n = 2) and halo distraction (n = 10). Preoperative and 2- to 3-month postoperative cephalograms were analyzed. The average horizontal advancement achieved in the standard Le Fort III group was 6 mm, compared with 19 mm of advancement in the distraction group (p </= 0.005). Complications were evenly distributed between the two groups (one infection and one tracheostomy in each group), and the lengths of hospitalization were similar. No documented improvement in sleep apnea was identified in the standard Le Fort III group. However, in the distraction group two patients experienced normalization of sleep studies postoperatively as measured by respiratory disturbance index, and two patients underwent successful decannulation of tracheotomies. For aesthetic reasons, halo distraction was preferred over bilateral buried distraction. With halo distraction the vector of traction is focused in the facial midline, which helps to reposition the concave midface and to provide a more convex facial profile. In growing children, the ideal vector for distraction is determined by the malar position and not by dental occlusion. The amount of overcorrection can be calculated from tables of normal anthropologic data. On this preliminary review, it was concluded that the use of halo distraction, in combination with a modified Le Fort III osteotomy, provided a significantly further forward-positioned midface and seemed to offer a better correction of sleep apnea than did the standard Le Fort III osteotomy.