 BACKGROUND: Various surgical techniques for the treatment of craniosynostosis using distraction devices have been described over the last few years and we have applied these procedures in seven patients with varying types of craniosynostosis. The aim of this report is to clarify the advantages and disadvantages of these surgical methods and to discuss current concepts for the surgical strategy in the treatment of craniosynostosis. MATERIAL AND METHODS: From January 2001 to March 2003, 25 patients with craniosynostosis were examined. Among them, 7 patients, 5 with Apert syndrome, 1 with Crouzon disease, and 1 with multiple-synostosis, underwent surgical treatment using the distraction method with internal distraction devices, according to our treatment strategy for craniosynostosis. All patients underwent preoperative and postoperative evaluations, which included the patient's neurological state, developmental quotient (DQ), and three-dimensional CT (3D-CT). RESULTS: The timing of the procedures undertaken was between the ages of 1 year 5 months and 12 years 6 months (mean age 4 years 11 months). Five patients had received previous treatment and this procedure was used as a secondary operation. Postoperative distraction distances varied from 7 to 20.5 mm (mean distraction distance: 14 mm). Satisfactory cranial volume expansion and aesthetically pleasing morphological states were achieved in all cases. Regarding complications, one patient required re-operation because of dislocation of the device and skin erosion caused by infection around the penetrated wound. Finally, in a second patient a distortion of the device occurred, but no re-operation was needed. CONCLUSION: The advantage of the distraction method is its applicability for Toddler or Elder Children Calvarial Reconstruction to correct cosmetic and functional problems. One disadvantage is the difficulty in using it for Infantile Calvarial Normalization because of thin calvarial bones and the necessity for re-operation to remove the device, which may result in it becoming a "fixation procedure," essentially contraindicated for the fast-developing brain and calvarias. However, the efficacy of this procedure is that the many advantages outweigh the disadvantages as sufficient calvarial expansion and good results using the distraction method, especially in toddler and elder children age groups, can be achieved.