Le Fort III osteotomy with midface distraction osteogenesis (Le Fort III DO) can improve the midface form and change the upper airway space. Some surgeons believe that midface advancement can improve respiratory outcome dramatically, but others think it does not predictably result in the cure of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). In this study, we evaluated the structural and functional changes of the upper airway before and after Le Fort III DO; we hope these studies can improve future protocols for midface advancement. A retrospective study of 11 patients with severe midface retrusion who underwent Le Fort III osteotomy with midface external distractor system was undertaken. These patients had an average of 5.4 months of follow-up. Three-dimensional volumetric assessment of the upper airway was used before and after surgery. We also evaluated the two-dimensional cross-sectional area of the upper airway to show the changes in different airway levels. Two patients with preoperative evidence of OSA were evaluated both preoperatively and postoperatively by overnight polysomnography. The midface was distracted for an average of 20.27 +/- 8.04 mm. Comparison between preoperative and postoperative three-dimensional computed tomographic data showed an average 64.30% increase in upper airway volume, an improvement of 9.13 +/- 6.94 mL (P < 0.05). The two-dimensional measurement also showed that the cross-sectional area at the posterior nasal spine and uvula airway level increased (P < 0.05), but the cross-sectional area at the epiglottis level and the separation of airway and esophagus level did not increase (P > 0.05). Two patients with preoperative evidence of OSA had both preoperative and postoperative sleeping studies that showed improvement. Le Fort III DO can significantly improve the upper airway space in the cases of syndromic craniosynostosis. The upper airway space above the uvula level was significantly enlarged after Le Fort III DO according to two-dimensional and three-dimensional image measurements, and according to the polysomnography, the OSA was alleviated. Le Fort III DO is a promising procedure in the treatment of severe midface retrusion with OSA in young patients.