The purpose of the paper is to describe and analyze the infant Apert skull with emphasis on the calvaria and its early postnatal development. Skull radiographs of 16 Apert syndrome patients were examined (12 American, 4 Danish; 8 males, 8 females). The criterion for inclusion in the study was that the first skull film had to be obtained before 1 year of age. Study methods employed included plain skull radiographs, roentgencephalometric films in several projections, CT-scans, and 3-D reconstructions. Data from 2 dry skulls and 2 early cases from the literature were also evaluated The following findings were common to all cases during early infancy (less than 3 months): The coronal suture area was prematurely closed and was represented by a bone condensation line beginning at the cranial base, extending upwards, and having a characteristic posterior convexity. Anterior and posterior fontanelles were widely patent. The midline of the calvaria had a gaping defect which extended from the glabellar area to the posterior fontanelle via the metopic suture area, anterior fontanelle, and sagittal suture area. Bony islands of varying sizes were observed in the midline defect. The calvaria was hypomineralized. During the first 2-4 years of life, the midline defect was obliterated by coalescence of the enlarging bony islands without evidence of any proper formation of sutures. The calvaria became thicker with time and several cases developed increased digital markings and enlargement of the sella turcica. During infancy, the Apert skull with its gaping midline defect appears to permit adequate accommodation of the growing brain, albeit distorted in shape. Normal metopic, sagittal, and coronal sutures with interdigitations were not observed in a single instance; in contrast, the lambdoidal sutures appeared normal in all cases. The invariable findings of an extremely short squama and orbital part of the frontal bone together with the posterior convexity of the coronal bone condensation line suggest that growth inhibition in the sphenofrontal and coronal suture area has its onset very early in fetal life.