As the second of a two-part series, 76 patients with pansynostosis and craniofacial synostosis syndromes were retrospectively analyzed. Diagnoses included pansynostosis (7), craniofrontonasal dysplasia (8), and Apert (24), Crouzon (15), and Pfeiffer (15) syndromes. All patients underwent primary fronto-orbital advancement-calvarial vault remodeling procedures at less than 18 months of age (mean 6.1 months). Twenty-eight patients (36.8 percent) required a secondary cranial vault operation (mean age 28.4 months). Additionally, a major tertiary procedure was necessary in 5 patients to deal with persistent unacceptable craniofacial form. To address the associated finding of midface hypoplasia, 64.8 percent (n = 35) of patients underwent Le Fort III midface advancement or had that procedure recommended for them. The remainder were awaiting appropriate age for this reconstruction. The more extensive pathologic involvement of the pansynostosis and craniofacial syndrome group is illustrated. As compared with the isolated craniofacial synostosis group previously reported, the incidence of major secondary procedures (36.8 versus 13.5 percent), perioperative complications (11.3 versus 5.0 percent), follow-up complications (44.7 versus 7.7 percent), hydrocephalus (42.1 versus 3.9 percent), shunt placement (22.4 versus 1.0 percent), and seizures (11.8 versus 2.9 percent) was significantly increased. Complex problems including those of increased intracranial pressure, airway obstruction, and recurrent turricephaly or cranial vault maldevelopment are repeatedly encountered. In addition, that early fronto-orbital advancement-cranial vault remodeling failed to promote midface development and hypoplasia of this region is almost a consistent finding in the craniofacial syndromic group. The average length of postoperative follow-up was 6 years. According to the classification of Whitaker et al., which assesses surgical results, 73.7 percent of patients were considered to have at least satisfactory craniofacial form (category I-II) at latest evaluation. An algorithmic approach to the treatment of all patients with craniosynostosis is presented utilizing early surgical intervention as the key element.