Stroke models in larger animals such as the cat, dog and monkey are becoming increasingly more expensive and less readily available. However, the rat is an excellent model for focal cerebral ischemia. Rats are readily available, inexpensive and their neuroanatomy and brain function have been studied extensively. Increases in plasma catecholamines and myocardial damage have been observed in clinical stroke. We examined autonomic and myocardial changes in two rat stroke models. In one model only the middle cerebral artery was occluded (MCAO) while the other model involved occlusion of both the MCA and the common carotid artery (MCAO/CCAO). Arterial blood pressure and heart rate were monitored continuously in 25 male rats (326-430 g) that underwent one of the following procedures: (1) MCAO only; (2) MCAO/CCAO; (3) CCAO only; and (4) sham occlusions (SHAM). Arterial blood samples (0.5 ml) for radioenzymatic assay of norepinephrine (NE) and epinephrine (E) were taken twice before the occlusions and at 90 and 180 min after the occlusions. The animals were perfused at the end of the experiment and the heart removed and examined histologically. Tetrazolium salts were reacted with oxidative enzymes to delineate the region of inadequate perfusion. The mean blood pressure and pulse pressure of the SHAM, MCAO/CCAO and CCAO groups significantly declined from initial values (from an average of 78 to 53 mm Hg) during the course of the experiment. However, the mean blood pressure and pulse pressure of the MCAO rats did not change during the experiment, so that the final mean blood pressure and pulse pressure were significantly higher than in the other 3 groups. The levels of both NE and E increased significantly (NE, 1443 +/- 285.9 to 4095 +/- 929 pg/ml; E, 2402 +/- 623 to 3741 +/- 1166 pg/ml) following occlusion in the MCAO group only while the other 3 groups did not change. Four of 6 hearts in the MCAO group were abnormal, showing evidence of subendocardial hemorrhage, ischemic damage or subendocardial congestion. MCAO also resulted in a consistent region of the brain with inadequate perfusion including the insular cortex. These autonomic and myocardial changes appear to mimic some of the changes seen clinically in stroke patients and provide the first acute stroke model for studying autonomic dysfunction in the rat.