MELAS is a distinctive syndrome manifested by mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and recurrent stroke-like episodes such as seizures, alternating hemiparesis, hemianopsia, or cortical blindness. Pathologically the disorder is characterized by multiple, solitary or continuous foci of necrosis (infarct or softening), varying in size and stage, predominantly involving the bilateral cerebral cortices and to a lesser degree cerebral white matter, basal ganglia, brainstem and cereblum. The distribution of the lesions does not correspond to vascular territories, suggesting that they are not due to usual thrombotic or embolic process. The exact nature and pathogenesis of these lesions with characteristic distribution pattern remain to be elucidated. We studied systematically cerebral blood vessels from two autopsied patients with MELAS by electron microscopy. All the main cerebral arteries including anterior, middle and posterior cerebral, basilar and vertebral arteries were examined at their proximal portions at the cerebral base and at their peripheral portions at the cortical surface as well as within brain parenchyma. We found marked accumulation of mitochondria in the cell bodies of smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells and numerous smooth muscle cells showing degeneration or necrosis, sporadically or in clusters in the tunica media. These abnormalities were most prominent in the walls of pial arterioles and small arteries up to 250 mu in diameter, and less frequent and severe in the larger pial arteries and intracerebral arterioles and small arteries. These vascular changes are different from any of those described in various disorders known to involve the cerebral blood vessels and are thus characteristic to the cerebral blood vessels of MELAS. We think that these peculiar vascular changes called mitochondrial angiopathy are caused by primary mitochondrial dysfunction in the vascular smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells themselves, as is the same in the skeletal and cardiac muscles in this disease, and that they constitute the pathogenic base of the brain lesions with unusual distribution pattern and nature in MELAS.