BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The induction of neuronal necrosis has been studied after various durations of transient middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion in the rat. The objective of the present study was to measure the numbers and anatomic distribution of cells exhibiting apoptotic bodies as an indication of DNA fragmentation and apoptotic cell death as a function of duration of transient MCA occlusion in the rat. METHODS: The MCA of male Wistar rats (n = 24) was occluded for 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes (n = 4 per group) with the use of an intraluminal monofilament, and reperfusion was instituted for 48 hours. DNA fragmentation was measured in paraffin sections with the use of a terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase (TdT)-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end-labeling (TUNEL) method. Adjacent sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for analysis of ischemic cell damage, and immunohistochemical double staining methods were used for cell identification. Sham-operated rats (n = 4) and normal rats not subjected to any surgical procedure (n = 4) were used as controls for apoptosis detection. RESULTS: Within 5-microns-thick coronal sections, DNA fragmentation was present in 0 to 3 apoptotic cells in each hemisphere of normal, sham-operated rats as well as in the contralateral hemisphere of ischemic rats. After 10 to 20 minutes of MCA occlusion, apoptotic cells exhibiting DNA fragmentation (10 to 20) increased in the regions of selective neuronal necrosis in the preoptic area and in the striatum. After 30 to 60 minutes of ischemia, scattered apoptotic cells (30 to 60) exhibited DNA fragmentation and expanded into areas of selective neuronal necrosis in the cortex. After 90 to 120 minutes of occlusion, groups of apoptotic cells (70 to 200, > 95% neurons) were primarily localized to the inner boundary zone of the infarct. CONCLUSIONS: A range of mild to severe ischemia-reperfusion stimuli induce internucleosomal DNA cleavage. The presence and anatomic location of apoptotic cells exhibiting DNA fragmentation after transient cerebral occlusion indicate that apoptosis accompanies neuronal necrosis.