Hyperhomocyst(e)inemia has been identified as an independent risk factor for atherosclerotic and thromboembolic diseases such as coronary artery disease, cerebral artery disease, and venous thrombosis. Recently, the alanine/valine (A/V) gene polymorphism of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), one of the key enzymes that catalyzes the remethylation of homocysteine, was reported. The VV genotype is correlated with increased plasma homocyst(e)ine levels as a result of the reduced activity and increased thermolability of this enzyme. In this study, we examined the association between the V allele of the MTHFR gene and ischemic stroke in an elderly Japanese population. The diagnosis of cerebral infarction of all study patients was confirmed by CT of the brain. The MTHFR genotype was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction followed by HinfI digestion. In 256 stroke patients and 325 control subjects, the frequencies of the V allele were 0.45 and 0.32, respectively. The odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals adjusted for the other risk factors were, respectively, 1.51 (1.02 to 2.23) for the AV genotype and 3.35 (1.94 to 5.77) for the VV genotype compared with the AA genotype. Both of these effects were statistically significant (P=0.041 and P<0.001, respectively). In patients with multiple infarcts in particular, the allele frequency of the V mutation was 0.56, and the association between the V allele and stroke was highly significant. Plasma homocyst(e)ine levels were significantly higher in patients with the VV genotype than in patients with the AA or AV genotype, especially those with low plasma folate levels. The V allele of the MTHFR gene was significantly associated with cerebral infarction in an elderly Japanese population in a codominant manner. The VV genotype may contribute to risk for ischemic stroke through a predisposition to increased plasma homocyst(e)ine levels, and dietary folate supplementation may be of benefit, particularly to patients with this genotype.