 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Prader-Willi (PWS) syndrome is characterized by severe hypotonia and feeding difficulties in early infancy, followed in later infancy or early childhood by excessive eating and gradual development of morbid obesity (unless eating is externally controlled). Motor milestones and language development are delayed. All individuals have some degree of cognitive impairment. A distinctive behavioral phenotype (with temper tantrums, stubbornness, manipulative behavior, and obsessive-compulsive characteristics) is common. Hypogonadism is present in both males and females and manifests as genital hypoplasia, incomplete pubertal development, and, in most, infertility. Short stature is common; characteristic facial features, strabismus, and scoliosis are often present, and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus often occurs in obese individuals. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Consensus clinical diagnostic criteria are accurate, but the mainstay of diagnosis is DNA-based methylation testing to detect abnormal parent-specific imprinting within the Prader-Willi critical region (PWCR) on chromosome 15; this testing determines whether the region is maternally inherited only (i. e., the paternally contributed region is absent) and detects more than 99% of affected individuals. Methylation-specific testing is important to confirm the diagnosis of PWS in all individuals, but especially those who have atypical findings or are too young to manifest sufficient features to make the diagnosis on clinical grounds. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: in infancy, special nipples or gavage feeding to assure adequate nutrition; physical therapy may improve muscle strength; hormonal and surgical treatments can be considered for cryptorchidism. In childhood, strict supervision of daily food intake based on height, weight, and body mass index (BMI) to provide energy requirements while limiting weight gain (keeping BMI <30). Growth hormone replacement therapy to normalize height, increase lean body mass and mobility, and decrease fat mass. Evaluation and treatment of sleep disturbance per the general population. Educational planning should be instigated and speech therapy provided if needed. Firm limit-setting to treat behavioral problems; serotonin reuptake inhibitors are helpful for most individuals. Replacement of sex hormones at puberty produces adequate secondary sexual characteristics. In adulthood, a group home for individuals with PWS that regulates behavior and weight management may prevent morbid obesity, and growth hormone may help to maintain muscle bulk.  Prevention of secondary complications: weight control to avoid development of diabetes mellitus; calcium supplementation to avoid osteoporosis.  Surveillance: infants should be screened for strabismus; routine monitoring of height, weight, and BMI to assure appropriateness of exercise program and diet.  Other: No medications are known to aid in controlling hyperphagia. GENETIC COUNSELING: PWS is caused by absence of the paternally derived PWS/Angelman syndrome (AS) region of chromosome 15 by one of several genetic mechanisms. The risk to the sibs of an affected child of having PWS depends on the genetic mechanism that resulted in the absence of the paternally contributed PWS/AS region. The risk to sibs is less than 1% if the affected child has a deletion or uniparental disomy, up to 50% if the affected child has a mutation of the imprinting control center, and up to 25% if a parental chromosomal translocation is present. Prenatal testing is possible for pregnancies at increased risk if the underlying genetic mechanism is known.