BACKGROUND: To the authors' knowledge previous reports of patient outcome for advanced stage low grade follicular lymphomas (LGFL) have not been population-based. This is the first report describing the outcome of these patients based on a population-based cohort. METHODS: A retrospective chart review was performed for all patients diagnosed with advanced stage LGFL between 1987-1995 for the adult population of central and northern Alberta, Canada. RESULTS: One hundred and fifty-seven patients were diagnosed with advanced stage LGFL. Approximately 45% of patients had died at last follow-up. Treatment was initiated at the time of diagnosis in 87 patients (55%), with alkylating agents used in 66% of them. Of the 70 patients not treated at the initial diagnosis, 69% had been treated at a median of 16.3 months. The overall median survival was 5.9 years. On univariate analysis, significant variables (P < 0.20) included age, B symptoms, symptomatic lymphadenopathy, symptomatic splenomegaly, splenomegaly, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status, baseline lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), diffuse component on histology, and treatment at the time of diagnosis. By multivariate analysis, the only factors that influenced survival significantly and independently were baseline LDH and B symptoms. An elevated baseline LDH had a hazard ratio of 2.80 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.65, 4.74) and a median survival of 8.0 years versus 3.6 years (P < 0.0001). B symptoms had a hazard ratio of 2.30 (95% CI, 1.23, 4.30) and a median survival of 6.5 years versus 3.1 years (P < 0.0067). CONCLUSIONS: Although some patients with advanced stage LGFL enjoy a prolonged survival, 80% of deaths in this cohort were attributable to lymphoma. The median overall survival of 5.9 years offers a less positive perspective on the outcome of these patients than in previous nonpopulation-based reports. This emphasizes the need for further population-based studies as well as new therapeutic approaches, especially those directed toward patients with poor prognostic features such as elevated baseline LDH and B symptoms.