PURPOSE: To analyze beta-integrin expression in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs) in order to assess its distribution among histologic subtypes and correlate with clinical features and outcome. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The expression of alpha2 through alpha6 and beta1 common chains of very late activation antigen (VLA ) molecules and alphaL (CD11a) and beta2 common (CD18) chains of leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 molecule were studied in 137 patients with NHL. Immunostaining was performed by a streptavidin-biotin alkaline phosphatase method, and integrin expression was semiquantitatively assessed. Correlation with clinical features was analyzed in 80 patients consecutively diagnosed as having immunocytoma (five cases), follicular lymphoma (19 cases), mantle-cell lymphoma (MCL; four cases), diffuse large-cell lymphoma (DLCL; 40 cases), lymphoblastic lymphoma (LL; six cases), anaplastic Ki-1-positive lymphoma (one case), and other peripheral T-cell lymphoma (five cases). RESULTS: MCL cells did not show alpha2 and alpha6 expression, whereas most expressed weak to moderate levels of alpha3, alpha4, and alpha5. LL mostly showed alpha2 to alpha5 expression, whereas alpha6 was observed in seven of 11 cases (higher proportion than that shown in other subgroups). Alpha chains of VLA molecules were present more frequently in T-cell than in B-cell lymphomas. Patients with moderate/strong alpha4, CD11a, and beta2 common chain expression presented more frequently with advanced stage and bone marrow infiltration. Moderate/strong alpha4, alpha5, and beta1 common chain expression correlated with extranodal involvement. In the subset of B-cell DLCL patients, negative/weak expression of alpha3 and alpha4 chains was related to a higher complete response rate. Moreover, negative or weak expression of alpha2, alpha3, alpha4, and beta1( )common chain had favorable significance for overall and failure-free survivals. CONCLUSION: In NHL, beta-integrin expression is related to histologic subtype. The expression pattern of these molecules probably influences disease dissemination and patients' prognoses.