Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MZBL) is a recently recognized low-grade lymphoma that has been well described in other organs such as the stomach and salivary gland. It has only recently been described in skin, where it may be difficult to distinguish from reactive processes and other types of B-cell lymphoma such as follicle center lymphoma. These cases may have been classified as pseudolymphomas in the past. Extranodal MZBL was referred to as mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma before the Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms was published in 1994. Important histologic features that aid in the diagnosis of MALT lymphoma are atypical lymphocytes (centrocyte-like and monocytoid B cells) often admixed with plasmacytoid lymphocytes, a prominent plasma cell component, lymphoepithelial lesions, intranuclear inclusions (Dutcher bodies), and reactive germinal centers that may be colonized by neoplastic cells. Immunophenotypic studies demonstrating a B-cell phenotype, light chain restriction, coexpression of CD43, and staining of atypical lymphocytes with bcl-2 support a diagnosis of MALT lymphoma. We studied 11 cases of extranodal MZBL of the skin from the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology files. There were six women and five men ranging in age from 30 to 69 years (median, 54 years). The anatomical sites included the trunk, head and neck areas, and upper extremities. There were no other sites of disease besides the skin in any of the cases. The follow-up period ranged from 5 months to 8 years (median, 24 months). Histologic results included an atypical lymphoid infiltrate with B-cell phenotype, reactive germinal centers, and a variable plasma cell component in all cases. No Dutcher bodies or lymphoepithelial lesions were noted. Extranodal MZBL of skin is a diagnostic challenge because of a heterogeneous cellular infiltrate that may be interpreted as a reactive process. The most significant neoplasm with which it is confused is follicular lymphoma. It is important to recognize the characteristic histologic and immunophenotypic features of extranodal MZBL so that the appropriate therapeutic approach may be applied.