The histogenesis, morphology, immunophenotype, and clinical behavior of cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas (CLBCL) are largely a matter of controversy. We performed an investigation to determine whether CLBCL have features that differentiate them from other large B-cell lymphomas and whether CLBCL is itself a heterogeneous group. To this end, we reviewed the main characteristics of a series of 32 cases of LBCL found in the skin. We reviewed the clinical findings and paraffin sections of the tumors from these 32 patients. The immunohistochemical study performed included p53, MIB1, Bcl2, Bcl6, and CD10 markers. We carried out statistical analysis of these data (univariate and multivariate), seeking an association between the features of the tumors and clinical outcome, as defined by failure-free survival time. Only one patient died as a consequence of the lymphoma. Nevertheless, the accumulated probability of survival without failure at 48 months was 0.46. The number, type, and localization of the lesions were not associated with variations in either survival or failure-free survival. The expression of p53 was negative in this group of CLBCL, whereas Bcl-2 expression or localization in the lower leg did not relate to any other significant feature. Histologic examination of the cases disclosed three different groups: Grade III follicular lymphomas (FLs), monomorphous large B-cell lymphomas (LBCL type I), and LBCL with an admixed component of small B-lymphocytes (LBCL type II). Grade III FL (11 cases) tended to be found in the head and neck and showed CD10 expression in a majority of cases. A higher probability of lymph node relapses was associated with cases located in the head and neck and with CD10+ tumors. Cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas are indolent tumors, but follow an insidious course. Our data support the interpretation that CLBCL is a heterogeneous condition; comprises some LBCL derived from CD10+ germinal center cells which manifests more frequently as tumors in the head and neck region, with an increased probability of relapse in lymph nodes [1] and has some distinctive morphologic features. The existence of a component of small B-cells within the other CLBCL could lend support to the theory that some of these tumors, more than arise de novo, may have originated in preexistent small B-cell lymphomas, but no firm evidence of this is provided in this study.