 BACKGROUND: There is recent evidence that the incidence of indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) appears to be increased in persons with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The current study was conducted to describe the clinical, immunologic, and pathologic characteristics of indolent B-cell lymphoma in patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). METHODS: The current report was a retrospective study of 10 cases of indolent NHL identified from the AIDS-Lymphoma Registry at the University of Southern California School of Medicine. These patients were compared with 336 consecutive patients with systemic intermediate/high-grade AIDS-related NHL who were diagnosed and treated at a single institution. RESULTS: The pathology of the indolent cases included follicular lymphoma (five patients), small lymphocytic lymphoma (two patients), and one case each of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), monocytoid B-cell, and marginal zone lymphoma. When comparing the indolent lymphomas with the intermediate/high-grade AIDS-NHL cases, no differences were observed with regard to demographic characteristics or history of prior opportunistic infection. HIV patients with indolent lymphomas were found to have a significantly higher median CD4+ lymphocyte count compared with patients with intermediate/high-grade NHL (531 /mm3 vs. 90 /mm3) (P < 0.0001). Bone marrow involvement was significantly more common in indolent NHL cases (50%) versus intermediate/high-grade NHL cases (17%) (P = 0.02). The median survival for patients with indolent NHL was significantly longer compared with patients with intermediate/high-grade NHL (66.8 months vs. 7.1 months) (P = 0.007). CONCLUSIONS: Indolent lymphomas occurring in patients infected with HIV appear to differ from intermediate/high-grade lymphomas with regard to immune status and propensity for bone marrow involvement and prolonged survival. The median survival in the group of HIV-seropositive patients with indolent NHL examined in the current study was found to be comparable to that reported in HIV-negative individuals.