 BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The t(14;18)(q32;q21) chromosomal translocation is the hallmark of follicular lymphomas (FL). The translocation induces the overexpression of the Bcl-2 protein and prolongs the survival of clonogenic cells. Tumor cells may acquire additional molecular alterations that may be associated with histologic progression or with chemo-resistance. DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the distribution and association of bcl-6 and p53 mutations in 55 consecutive bcl-2/Jh+ lymphoma samples derived from 43 patients obtained at the time of diagnosis and, in 5 of these patients, during follow-up. A total of 29 bcl-6 point mutations were detected in seventeen patients (40%) associated with major or minor breakpoints of the bcl-2/Jh fusion gene. In seven cases a p53 mutation was detected. Three cases corresponded to FL with the minor breakpoint in the bcl-2 gene and these patients had a favorable clinical evolution, whereas the 4 patients with p53 mutations and the major breakpoint had a bad clinical outcome with morphologic transformation to high-grade lymphoma in three cases. The sequential analysis of 5 patients showed a different timing in the acquisition of mutations: one patient showed bcl-6 and p53 mutations at diagnosis, another patient showed bcl-6 mutations at diagnosis and acquired a p53 mutation later whereas the third patient had a p53 mutation before the appearance of the bcl-6 mutation. RESULTS: We did not find significant differences in survival between patients with FL who showed exclusively bcl-6 mutations and those without bcl-6 mutations, but those patients with a high International Progostic Index score and p53 mutations showed the lowest overall survival (p = 0.002). INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that bcl-2/Jh lymphomas show molecular heterogeneity and that bcl-6 and p53 mutations may be acquired during the evolution of such lymphomas. Bcl-6 mutations, by themselves, do not seem to be associated with a bad prognosis. Rearrangements at the minor bcl-2 locus may have a different molecular evolution.