 BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Primary thyroid lymphoma (PTL) is rare, the clinical treatment strategy and prognosis prediction are still to be unified. The objective of this article was to explore the clinical manifestation, diagnosis, treatment and the patients' prognosis, and the main prognostic factors of PTL. METHODS: The general information, clinical and pathologic classification, treatment method of 28 cases of PTL were reviewed retrospectively and analyzed in combination with the follow-up information of 24 cases of this tumor. RESULTS: In spite of 4 cases lost follow-up, 24 cases were followed-up for 1 to 14 years, the median time was 3 years. Clinical classification, all the 3 cases in the group of the age less than 40 years were intraglandular type, 7 of 9 cases in the group of the age of 40-60 years were intraglandular type, 2 cases were extraglandular type, 7 and 9 cases in the group of the age more than 60 years were intraglandular and extraglandular type separately. By the end of this follow-up period, among these 24 cases, 6 of the 9 patients in the clinical extraglandular type group and only 2 of 15 patients of the clinical intraglandular type group died of PTL. Twenty cases whose neck masses were surgically removed completely lived 1 year or more, but all the 4 cases whose neck masses were resected incompletely lived less than 1 year. Pathologically, 11 cases of the B cell type, large lymphocytic group were still survival, the longest survival time was 68 months; but all the 3 cases of the follicular lymphoma II died of PTL within 18 months. The total survival rate of these 24 patients of 1 year,3 year,and 5 year were 61.54%, 43.31%, and 27.35%, separately. CONCLUSION: The proper treatment strategy of primary lymphoma of thyroid gland is complete resection of the tumor followed by the post-operative radical radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The patient's age, clinical classification, and radical resection may be dosely related to the patient's survival. No significant relationship was found between the patient's survival and the pathologic classification of PTL