In order to elucidate the role of anthracycline based combination chemotherapy regimens for the treatment of follicular lymphoma we conducted a retrospective study on a large series of patients with a histologically confirmed diagnosis of follicular lymphoma. The Italian lymphoma intergroup (ILI) promoted a retrospective study of patients with follicular lymphoma treated in cooperative trials between 1985 and 1996. Six hundred and thirty three cases were treated with an anthracycline-containing regimen and 128 patients were treated without anthracyclines. The two groups were prognostically comparable; in particular, no difference was observed according to both IPI and ILI prognostic index. Results showed a complete remission (CR) rate for patients treated with anthracyclines was 69.2% and overall response rate was 92.5%. After a median follow-up of 51 months (54 months for patients still alive), the 5- and 10-year overall survival (OS) rates were 80 and 66%, respectively. Disease-free survival (DFS) and failure-free survival (FFS) rates at 5 years were 61 and 49%, respectively. In the group of patients treated with combination chemotherapy not including anthracyclines, the CR rate was 67.5% and the overall response rate was 85.4%. A longer OS (80% at 5 years) was observed in patients treated with anthracyclines compared to 67% OS rate in patients treated without anthracyclines (p = 0.0004). FFS was significantly longer in patients treated with anthracyclines (49 vs. 34% p = 0.006). Patients treated with anthracyclines with low or intermediate risk according to ILI prognostic index showed a significantly longer OS (p = 0.0001 andp = 0.0009, respectively); those in the high-risk group showed a trend for a longer survival. In conclusion, this retrospective study shows that patients with follicular lymphoma treated with an anthracycline containing regimen had a better outcome compared to patients treated with other combination regimens non including anthracyclines in terms of CRs, OS and FFS. On the basis of these results anthracycline-containing regimens (ACR) should be considered as the standard treatment of patients with advanced follicular lymphoma.