We describe two elderly patients with follicular lymphoma (FL) involving the skin and superficial soft tissues, with a striking proliferation of follicular dendritic cells (FDC). In addition, one patient had bone marrow involvement by FL. Histopathologically, the most remarkable feature in both cases seen at low magnification was a striking pallor of the constituent cells, which were arranged in fascicles, whorls, and round islands. The majority of the cells had the typical cytologic features of FDCs. They were intimately intermingled with centroblasts and centrocytes. A large amount of the clear cytoplasm and the pale nuclei of FDCs, which predominated in the tumors, caused the striking overall pallor of the lesions. Small reactive lymphocytes were scattered between the fascicles. A vague follicular growth pattern was seen only focally. The mantle zones were markedly reduced or absent so that the follicles were seen lying unseparated. The close intermixture of the FDCs and the germinal center cells was responsible for the FDCs appearing to be decorated with B-associated marker, and the germinal center cells seemed to be stained to some degree with FDC-markers. The tumor bulk demonstrated a diffuse and strong reaction with CD10, CD20, CD21, CD35, and stained weakly with CD79a. Fascin and CD23 showed only a weak and focal staining pattern. Bcl-2 decorated large centroblasts and small reactive T-cells. The tumor bulk was negative for actin, EMA, cytokeratins, vimentin, desmin, and factor XIIIa. The proliferative index was rather low; MIB-1 mainly decorated large centroblasts. No monoclonal rearrangement of IgH genes was detected. Epstein-Barr virus was not identified. Electron microscopy revealed typical features of FDCs intermingled with germinal center cells. Such cases may represent a diagnostic pitfall, as FDC overgrowth can mask FL and give the neoplasm the appearance of FDC sarcoma/tumor. We believe that, in both cases, the FDC proliferation had a reactive character.