 OBJECTIVE: To discuss the clinicopathological features and prognostic factors of gastric lymphoma. METHODS: 83 gastric lymphoma cases were analyzed retrospectively in accordance to the criteria of the new World Health Organization classification for neoplastic diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. The correlations between clinicopathological features, therapeutic measures and survival were discussed. RESULTS: The age of patients ranged from 25 to 77, with a median of 52. The number of males were similar to that of females. There were no specific symptoms. The most common symptoms were stomach ache (60 cases, 72%) or discomfort. The duration of symptoms was often long and with a history of chronic gastric diseases (21 cases, 25%). 13 cases had multiple lesions in the gastrointestinal mucosa. 51 cases (61%) were accompanied by lymph node involvement. According to the new World Health Organization classification for neoplastic diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, 57 cases were extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)-type (MALT lymphoma), 23 were diffuse large B cell lymphoma accompanying MALT lymphoma, 2 were diffuse large B cell lymphoma and 1 was follicular lymphoma. Of all the cases, 31 were stage I E, 38 stage II E, 8 stage III E and 6 stage IV by the Ann Arbor staging system (1972). The total 5-year and 10-year survival rates were 77.8% and 70.1% respectively, with the mean survival time of 146 months. The 5-year and 10-year survival rates of MALT lymphoma were 77.4% and 72.3%, the 5-year and 10-year survival rates of diffuse large B cell lymphoma accompanying MALT lymphoma were 81.8% and 68.2%, the 5-year survival rate of diffuse large B cell lymphoma was 50.0%. CONCLUSIONS: There are no specific symptoms in gastric lymphoma patients. Extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of MALT-type is the main histopathological type of gastric lymphoma, often accompanied by multiple mucosa involvement and also often accompanied by a history of chronic gastric disease. The lesion is usually localized for a long time, with a very good prognosis. Survival rate has a significant correlation with lymph node involvement and clinical stage. No correlations were found between the survival rates with age, gender, B symptoms, invasive depth of the wall of stomach, the size and range of the tumors or different therapeutic measures.