 OBJECTIVE: To explore the feasibility of semi-nested PCR technique for detection of immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) clonal rearrangement in bone marrow of B-cell lymphoma patient and to further evaluate its clinicopathological value. METHODS: Gene clonal rearrangement of IgH was detected by semi-nested PCR using primers of FR2 & FR3A in 105 bone marrow samples of patients with B-cell lymphoma. The PCR detection results were compared with the cytomorphology of bone marrow aspiration biopsy. The correlation between PCR detection results and clinicopathological factors were evaluated. RESULTS: Among 105 cases of B-cell lymphoma, bone marrow involvement was detected by PCR technique in 48 cases (45.7%), while only 22 cases (21.0%) were detected by bone marrow cytological analysis. There was a significant difference between two methods (P < 0.05), and the concordance rate was 71.4%. The incidence of bone marrow involvement at the time of initial diagnosis detected by PCR technique was 30.8% for diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), 25.0% for follicular lymphoma (FL), and 100.0% for small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL), respectively. Bone marrow involvement detected by PCR detection correlated with Ann Arbor stage. Rate of clonal IgH gene rearrangement by PCR in early B-cell lymphoma was lower than that in advanced stage B-cell lymphoma patients (P = 0.02). There was no statistically significant difference in efficacy between patients with positive and negative results detected by PCR (P > 0.05). But difference in complete response (CR) rate (23.3% and 46.3%) had significant difference (P = 0.019). CONCLUSION: Semi-nested PCR analysis may be an effective method for detection of abnormalities in bone marrow in patients with B-cell lymphoma and is superior to cytomorphology. The positive rate in patients with advanced Ann Arbor stage is higher than that in patients with early Ann Arbor stage, and patients with PCR negative result have more chances to achieved CR after treatment.