The distribution and pathological significance of sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 expression are still unclear. In this study, we evaluated sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1's suitability as a diagnostic marker for malignant lymphoma by immunostaining formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections using a well-defined commercial anti-sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 antibody. Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 was strongly expressed on the surface of small lymphocytes forming primary lymphoid follicles and in the mantle zone of secondary lymphoid follicles. Microarray-based immunohistochemistry with tissue samples from 85 lymphoid malignancy cases demonstrated that sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 was expressed on the surface of mantle cell lymphoma cells. Strong expression was observed in all classical mantle cell lymphoma cases involving the lymph node (19 out of 19), gastrointestinal tract (10 out of 10), bone marrow (9 out of 9), and orbita (1 out of 1). Good results were obtained even in sections where cyclin D1 signals were lost because of over-fixation and/or decalcification. One aggressive variant of mantle cell lymphoma displayed a weaker membranous staining than classical mantle cell lymphoma in the lymph node and bone marrow. In a cyclin D1-negative mantle cell lymphoma of the orbita, no conclusive result was obtained. No cases of follicular lymphoma, marginal zone lymphoma, B lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, or Burkitt's lymphoma showed any significant expression, whereas 2 out of 6 chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphomas in bone marrow, 1 out of 3 lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas in the lymph node, and 2 out of 37 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas exhibited staining. A quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction-based analysis of mantle cell lymphoma lines revealed the sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 mRNA expression level to be well correlated with the results of immunocytochemistry, flow cytometry, and western blotting. Thus, sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 immunohistochemistry may be useful in the histological diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma with formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded sections. The antigen may be particularly valuable in cases where cyclin D1 immunostaining is not successful.