Microenvironmental factors play a critical role in B-cell lymphomas. Most studies emphasize the role of lymphoma-infiltrating T-cells and macrophages, with few studies on natural killer cells. Natural killer cells include a less mature (CD56(bright)/CD16-) subset that is more common in lymph nodes and a more mature (CD56(dim)/CD16+) subset that is more numerous in peripheral blood. Therefore, the proportions of natural killer cells, natural killer subsets, and natural killer-like T-cells (CD3+, CD56+, and/or CD16/57+) were determined by flow cytometry in 150 cases of tissue-based B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma and 89 nonneoplastic tissue biopsies. Results were correlated with the clinicopathologic findings. A higher percentage of natural killer cells was found in nonneoplastic spleen versus other nonneoplastic tissue (P < .001), in splenic-based B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma versus other B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (P < .01), and in stage II to IV diffuse large B-cell lymphoma versus stage I diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (n = 19, P = .02). The more mature natural killer subset was increased in benign spleen (P < .001) and nonsplenic B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (P < .01) versus nonsplenic, nonneoplastic tissue; in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma versus other B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (P < .001); and in follicular lymphoma with an intermediate follicular lymphoma international prognostic index score (n = 17, P = .04). A higher proportion of natural killer-like T-cells was seen in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma versus other B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (P = .001), whereas chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma contained fewer natural killer-like T-cells (P < .001). The proportions of natural killer cells, natural killer subsets, and natural killer-like T-cells vary with tissue site, type of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and clinical stage in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma. A higher proportion of CD56(dim)/CD16/57+ natural killer cells is found in spleen, in more aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and in follicular lymphoma with an intermediate follicular lymphoma international prognostic index score. This may be of importance with increasing therapeutic use of immunomodulatory agents.