Lenalidomide, a novel immunomodulatory drug (IMiD), is a promising therapeutic strategy for patients with relapsed/refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and B-cell lymphomas. Biologically, the mechanisms responsible for lenalidomide activity are yet to be clearly defined. Based on preclinical models and early correlative studies conducted in parallel to clinical trials, lenalidomide has been found to enhance natural killer (NK)- and T-cell activity against tumor cells, alter the balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in the tumor bed, inhibit angiogenesis, and, to a lesser degree, induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in cancer cells. Together, all of these biological effects appear to play a role in the activity observed in CLL or lymphoma patients treated with lenalidomide. Given the effect in NK- and T-cell function, lenalidomide is an alternative strategy to enhance the antitumor activity of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). Clinical responses have been observed in patients with relapsed/refractory CLL, follicular lymphoma, small lymphocytic lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) treated with lenalidomide single agent. The favorable toxicity profile and route of administration made the use of lenalidomide an attractive therapy for certain types of patients (i.e. elderly, chemotherapy unfit, etc.). The erratic but serious incidence of tumor lysis syndrome and/or tumor flare reactions provides challenges in the incorporation of lenalidomide in the management of previously untreated CLL or CLL/lymphoma patients with bulky adenopathy. Correlative studies and/or retrospective analysis of lenalidomide-treated patients had identified several biomarkers associated with clinical endpoints in CLL (i.e. changes in tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF-α] or vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF] levels) or DLBCL (non-GCB phenotype) patients, but need to be validated. Early studies evaluating the efficacy and toxicity of lenalidomide in combination with rituximab in previously untreated indolent lymphoma are promising and warrant further study. In addition, the evaluation of lenalidomide in the maintenance setting or in combination with other target-specific agents (i.e. proteasome inhibitors) in aggressive lymphomas is being addressed in ongoing clinical trials. In summary, lenalidomide is emerging as a biologically active and novel agent in the treatment of B-cell neoplasms. Future translational and clinical studies will further define the role of lenalidomide in the management of de novo or relapsed/refractory CLL or B-cell lymphomas and identify the subset of patients most likely to gain clinical benefit.