Tissues from 72 cases (87 specimens) of various non-Hodgkin's lymphomas were analyzed for cell markers using multiple techniques. Cell suspensions were evaluated for E, EAC, and IgGEA rosette forming cells; Fc receptor cells; and surface immunoglobulin bearing cells. Cryostat section studies topographically defined EAC binding cells. Cytochemical determinations and immunoperoxidase methods for detection of intracellular immunoglobulin and lysozyme complemented other techniques in evaluating infiltrates containing large neoplastic cells. B-cell malignancies comprised 58 cases (80%) of this series and included well and moderately well differentiated lymphocytic lymphomas (10/10); nodular (23/23) and diffuse (10/18) poorly differentiated lymphocytic lymphomas; and lymphomas of mixed lymphocytic-"histiocytic" (3/3), "undifferentiated" (3/3), and "histiocytic" (9/13) types. Nodular lymphomas were characterized as B-cell neoplasms but also revealed a prominent population of T lymphocytes (39 +/- 12%). Alkaline phosphatase activity, a cytochemical marker for lymphoid cells of follicular cuffs, was most consistently observed in B-cell lymphomas of moderately well differentiated lymphocytic type (4/6 cases). In some diffuse lymphomas, cryostat section studies (EAC rosettes) suggested a pre-existing nodular proliferation. One unusual B-cell lymphoma of large cell type exhibited IgGEA rosette formation and a strong receptor for the Fc portion of IgG. Ten lymphomas (14%) were of T-cell type and were represented by cases of diffuse poorly differentiated lymphocytic lymphoma (5/18, including 3 lymphoblastic lymphomas), Sézary syndrome (1), mycosis fungoides (1), and a cytologically distinctive large cell ("histiocytic") lymphoma (3/13). Acid phosphatase activity was a consistent marker for the T-cell malignancies, some of which also revealed alpha-naphthyl butyrate esterase activity. No true histiocytic lymphomas were detected. Three cases of diffuse poorly differentiated lymphocytic lymphoma and one "histiocytic" lymphoma were null.