The BLA expression of eight Burkitt lymphoma lines was high, whereas it was negative in four, including the two IgG producers tested. Most lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) of normal origin had only a low percentage of positive cells, not significantly above background, although a few had up to 30% positives. EBV conversion of the EBV-negative Burkitt lymphoma line Ramos destabilized the high BLA expression, leading to a decrease in the average number of positive cells in the majority of the converted sublines in parallel with considerable fluctuation in antigen expression within each subline. Our group has previously shown that EBV-conversion of Ramos cells can induce certain differentiation steps (Spira et al., 1981 a). EBV-converted sublines of another EBV-negative Burkitt lymphoma, BJAB, showed a much greater stability previously and remained unchanged with regard to BLA expression in our present experiments. Eight T-cell leukemias, three myeloid leukemia lines and two diffuse histiocytic lymphomas were negative for BLA, whereas two myeloma lines were 30-40% positive. A histiocytic tumor had marginal reactions. Hybrids derived from the fusion of high with low BLA-reactive parental lines showed all three possible patterns (high, intermediate and low), provided that B-cell lines were fused with each other. Fusion of two Burkitt lymphoma lines with the K562 erythroleukemia line led to the extinction of BLA expression, as well as to the eclipse of other B-cell markers. B-lymphoma and leukemia (CLL) cells harvested directly from the patient showed a heterogeneous reactivity pattern. Strong to intermediate BLA expression was found among CLL cells and in most histological groups of B-CLL lymphomas except the centroblastic group (3/3 negatives). IgG-expressing follicular lymphomas were less reactive than IgM +/- IgD lymphomas of the same group. Immunocytomas were also low-reactive. BLA can be thus expressed on a variety of B-cell neoplasms; the degree of its expression appears to be related to the stage of differentiation.