PURPOSE: To assess myeloablative therapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT) in younger patients with follicular lymphoma in the hope of prolonging remission duration and survival. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Since June 1985, 64 patients with follicular lymphoma have received cyclophosphamide (CY) 60 mg/kg x 2 and total-body irradiation (TBI) 2 Gy x 6 supported by ABMT as consolidation of second or subsequent remission. The marrow mononuclear cell (MNC) fraction was treated in vitro with three cycles of the monoclonal antibody (MAb) anti-CD20 and baby rabbit complement before cryopreservation. At the time of treatment, 34 patients were in complete remission (CR), and 30 had residual disease present. RESULTS: The median time to engraftment was 28 days (range, 15 to 46) for both a neutrophil count greater than 0.5 x 10(9)/L and a platelet count greater than 20 x 10(9)/L. Engraftment did not occur in one patient who died at 12 weeks, and three patients (excluded from the range) have had delayed recovery (> 6 months) of RBCs and platelets. Fifty two patients are alive; three died as a consequence of the transplant procedure, two died in remission from other causes, and seven died of recurrent lymphoma. There was a significant correlation between survival and the total number of episodes of treatment required during the course of the illness (< or = to three v > three, P = .01). With a median follow-up duration of 3 1/2 years, 35 patients continue in remission between 1 and 8 years, and 24 have developed recurrent lymphoma, five with evidence of transformation to high-grade histology. Freedom from recurrence did not correlate with the time from diagnosis, the number of previous treatments, the presence or absence of residual disease at the time of treatment, or during which specific remission the treatment was given (second v > second). However, comparison with an age-matched, remission-matched, historical control group shows a significant advantage in favor of treatment with CY plus TBI plus ABMT (P = .001); currently, there is no difference in survival. CONCLUSION: These results are encouraging, although preliminary; it remains to be established whether this treatment prolongs survival.