The t(14;18) chromosomal translocation occurs in most follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and places the Bcl-2 gene on chromosome 18q21 into the immunoglobulin JH region on chromosome 14q32. This translocation can be exploited to detect clonal malignant cells bearing this genetic alteration. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay amplifying over the major breakpoint region (mbr) and minor cluster region (mcr) was developed and optimized. In this report, the sensitivity and reproducibility of this semiquantitative assay, performed on a relatively large number of clinical samples is shown. A titration curve of DNA made from a t(14;18)- cell line admixed with increasing ratios of a t(14;18)+ cell line was used to demonstrate that one t(14;18)+ cell in 100,000 t(14;18)- cells could reproducibly be detected. Occult lymphoma cells, not detected by standard morphologic analysis, were demonstrated in almost two-thirds of the bone marrow and peripheral blood specimens obtained from untreated patients with follicular lymphoma. Of 11 bone marrow samples assessed, seven were positive for occult disease by PCR amplification over the mbr and one was positive over the mcr. Of these six positive marrow samples, only three had been reported positive by standard morphologic criteria. In addition, seven of nine peripheral blood samples assessed were positive over the mbr and one additional sample was positive over the mcr. None of these were morphologically positive. Seven of the above patients would have been upstaged if these results were utilized for staging, including two of three patients with stage I or stage II disease. PCR-detectable occult disease persisted in four of four patients assessed both pre- and post-treatment, even after aggressive multi-drug combination chemotherapy in two of these patients. The clinical significance of detecting this occult disease must await the study of larger numbers of patients and the clinical outcomes of patients with occult disease and patients without occult disease.