We report a series of B-cell neoplasms with regard to rearrangement of the BCL6 gene on chromosome band 3q27. Southern blot analysis using probes from the major translocation cluster (MTC) region of the BCL6 revealed rearrangement in 21/197 patients (10.7%) with B-cell neoplasms studied at presentation, and 11/25 patients (44%) first studied at relapse. In non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) studied at diagnosis, rearrangements of the BCL6 gene were not closely associated with a specific histopathologic subtype but distributed in subcategories in the Working Formulation. The incidence in follicular lymphoma was 12.1%, with significantly higher frequency in mixed and large cell subtypes, and that in diffuse aggressive lymphoma was 14.1%. Comigration analysis using probes from the immunoglobulin genes revealed association of the BCL6 gene with one of the three immunoglobulin loci in 9/25 cases analysed. A comparative study between NHL associated either with BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangement showed that advanced disease and bone marrow involvement were more frequent in BCL2(+) NHL. In contrast, extranodal involvement was more frequently observed in the BCL6(+) NHL. The survival curve of BCL6(+) NHL was characterized by a rapid decline followed by a plateau. Of the total of 32 BCL6(+) patients, six carried both BCL2 and BCL6 rearrangements; five of these six showed clinicopathological properties characteristic of follicular lymphoma, suggesting that the presence of the two genetic abnormalities does not necessarily have synergistic effects on malignant phenotypes. The high level of BCL6 expression in follicular lymphoma cell lines carrying a BCL2 rearrangement suggests that the deregulated BCL2 gene may have an effect on the development of genetic abnormalities of the BCL6 gene. The present study suggests that BCL6 gene rearrangement is primarily involved in large cell lymphoma irrespective of growth pattern of neoplastic cells, and that BCL6(+)BCL2(-) NHL could be curable with modern intensive chemotherapy.