The molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of aggressive lymphomas and the histological transformation of indolent variants are not well known. To determine the role of p16(INK4a) gene alterations in the pathogenesis of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs) and the histological progression of indolent variants, we have analyzed the expression, deletions, and mutations of this gene in a series of 112 NHLs. Hypermethylation of the gene was also examined in a subset of tumors with lack of protein expression but without mutations or deletions of the gene. p16(INK4a) gene alterations were detected in 3 out of 64 (5%) indolent lymphomas but in 16 out of 48 (33%) primary or transformed aggressive variants. In the low-grade tumors, p16(INK4a) alterations were detected in 1 (4%) chronic lymphocytic leukemia (hemizygous missense mutation), 1 (6%) follicular lymphoma (homozygous deletion), and 1 (5%) typical mantle cell lymphoma (homozygous deletion). The two later cases followed an aggressive clinical evolution. In the aggressive tumors, p16(INK4a) gene alterations were observed in 2 (29%) Richter's syndromes (2 homozygous deletions), 3 (33%) transformed follicular lymphomas (1 homozygous deletion and 2 nonsense mutations), 3 (43%) blastoid mantle cell lymphomas (2 homozygous and 1 hemizygous deletions), 5 (28%) de novo large-cell lymphomas (1 homozygous deletion and 4 hypermethylations), 2 lymphoblastic lymphomas (2 homozygous deletions), and 1 of 2 anaplastic large cell lymphomas (hypermethylation). Protein expression was lost in all tumors with p16(INK4a) alterations except in the typical chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) with hemizygous point mutation. Sequential samples of the indolent and transformed phase of three cases showed the presence of p16(INK4a) deletions in the Richter's syndrome but not in the CLL component of two cases, whereas in a follicular lymphoma the deletion was present in both the follicular tumor and in the diffuse large-cell lymphoma. In conclusion, these findings indicate that p16(INK4a) gene alterations are a relatively infrequent phenomenon in NHLs. However, deletions, mutations, and hypermethylation of the gene with loss of protein expression are associated with aggressive tumors and they may also participate in the histological progression of indolent lymphomas.