 OBJECT: The goal of this study was to assess the effectiveness and handling characteristics of a dura substitute composed of two outer layers of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and a middle layer consisting of an elastomeric fluoropolymer. METHODS: In a prospective multicenter study, the dura substitute was implanted using a standard technique in 119 patients undergoing cranial or spinal surgery requiring duraplasty. Intraoperative assessments of the dura patch consisted of testing for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage employing the Valsalva maneuver and a surgeon's standard evaluation of the handling characteristics of the device. Postoperative assessments conducted during a mean follow-up time of 15.7 months (range 0.3-45.6 months) consisted of physical examinations, routine computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging studies, and histological studies of any removed dura patches. The mean age of the 119 patients was 40 years (range < 1-81 years). The dura substitute was implanted cranially in 102 patients and spinally in 17. Intraoperative assessment including the Valsalva maneuver led to application of additional sutures in 17 patients. Handling features were rated very good to excellent. Postoperative clinical evaluation resulted in 79 excellent and 18 good results. Imaging studies (MR imaging studies in 69 patients and CT studies in 34 patients) showed no adhesions in 87 patients and minimal adhesions in seven patients (the dura was not visualized in nine patients). Postoperative complications occurred in 12 patients. There were six cases of CSF leakage, three cases of extradural hematoma, one case of arachnoid fibrosis after decompression of a Chiari malformation Type I, and two cases of infection. Eight (7%) of these complications were potentially related to the dura patch. CONCLUSIONS: In a large, multicenter clinical study of the use of an expanded-PTFE-containing dura substitute, the device was found to be easy to handle and implant. No serious dura patch-related intraoperative adverse events were observed. Postoperatively, there were no major sealing problems or long-term complications. In two cases the patch had to be removed due to fibrosis and infection. The three-layer polymer dura substitute appears to be safe and effective in minimizing CSF leakage and adhesion formation, and its use avoids any risk of prion disease transmission.