BACKGROUND: Leg ulcres can be seen as manifestations of antiphospholipid syndromes but their pathogenic relationship with vascular thrombotic events secondary to antiphospholipid antibodies remains to be defined with precision. A significant association between anticardiolipin antibodies and venous leg ulcers has been described. We conducted this study to determine whether such an association is found in venous ulcers and if it could also be present in cases involving the arterial and/or arteriolar circulation. PATIENTS AND METHODS: From December 1995 to March 1997, 48 patients with leg ulcers involving venous (27 cases), arteriovenous (9 cases) or arteriolar (12 cases) circulations were admitted. The etiologic diagnosis was based on clinical presentation and duplex Doppler findings examining the superficial and deep venous and arterial circuits. Antiphospholipid antibodies were searched for in all cases: VDRL, ELISA for IgG and IgM antiphospholipid antibodies, antiprothrombinase circulating anticoagulant. RESULTS: Circulating anticoagulants were found in 22 of the 48 patients (46%): 12/27 (44%) involved venous leg ulcers (anticardiolipin antibodies, 5 cases; circulating anticoagulants, 4 cases; both, 2 cases); 1/9 involved arteriovenous ulcers (anticardiolipin antibodies, 5 cases); 9/12 involved arteriolar ulcers (anticardiolipin antibodies, 3 cases; circulating anticoagulants, 6 cases; both, 3 cases). Seven of the 9 patients also had severe arteritis. A past history of venous thrombosis was found in 3 cases with venous ulcers and antiphospholipid antibodies. One patient among the 5 with arteriolar ulcers had a past history of arterial thrombosis. DISCUSSION: Our cohort is too small for a formal conclusion but underlines two points: 1. antiphospholipid antibodies can be associated with venous ulcers independently of thrombosis history. The hypothesis that leukocyte stasis and endothelial cell activation causes an immune reaction implicating antiphospholipid antibodies has been put forward. The usefulness of an antiaggregate treatment or an anticoagulant treatment should be discussed, 2. The possible association between arteriolar ulcers and antiphospholipid antibodies requires further large scale studies.