Recent scientific developments enable to better understand the strong heterogeneity of assay methods for phospholipid (PLP)-dependent antibodies, measured as lupus anticoagulant (LA) or as anti-PLP antibodies (APA). These latter are actually targeted at complexes of beta(2)-glycoprotein I (beta2GPI) and anionic PLP and also react with insolubilized beta2GPI alone in some patients. Although APA present little species specificity for beta2GPI, some of them bind preferentially to complexes of human beta2GPI and PLP. LAs are diagnosed with screening assays (dPT, dRVVT, KCT, APTT); their sensitivity is dependent on the concentration and type of PLPs used. They are either beta2GPI or prothrombin dependent. Based on the antibody-neutralizing capacity of PLP preparations (such as hexagonal phase phosphatidylethanolamine) or their bypassing activity, confirmatory assays enable to confirm LA. LAs and APAs bind to different epitopes on beta2GPI or its complexes with PLP. Major characteristics of APA assays are: the capture antigen (PLPs, beta2GPI source); its optimization and density on micro-ELISA plates; the efficacy of postcoating saturation; the animal serum used for saturation and diluent; the second antibody which must avoid nonspecific interactions; the calibrators proposed and their reference to international standards; the cutoff between the normal and the pathological ranges; the assay sensitivity and overall specificity for APAs. New optimized assays have been developed to meet these criteria. They are designed with PLP-coated plates, saturated first with immunoglobulin-free human serum as a source of beta2GPI, then with goat serum also used in diluent. The cutoff value is determined with at least 200 normal plasma samples (mean + 3 standard deviations or 99th percentiles) and plasma samples from patients without APAs. This approach offers both optimized specificity and sensitivity for testing APAs, along with a good standardization and it helps to measure the true APAs associated with pathology.