Antibody-mediated disorders of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome have remarkably similar clinical presentations, both of which can progressively result in severe vascular and thrombotic disorders. We hypothesized that the mechanism of platelet activation as occurs in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia may also occur in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome particularly at the vascular wall, that endothelial injury may be similar in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, and that these alterations may be caused by related antibodies. Antibody titers and vascular endothelial damage in patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome were studied in plasma samples collected from normals (n = 17), heparin-induced thrombocytopenia patients (n = 15), antiphospholipid antibody syndrome patients (n = 30), and patients clinically diagnosed with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (n = 8). Diagnosis of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia was confirmed by 14C-serotonin release assay or positive antiheparin-platelet factor 4 antibody titer, and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome was confirmed by positive anti-beta 2-glycoprotein (GP) 1/cardiolipin (IgG or IgM) antibody titer. The antiheparin-platelet factor 4 antibody was not detected in any patient with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia did not have elevated IgG anti-beta 2-GP1 titers, but three (20%) patients had low-positive IgM anti-beta 2-GP1 titers. The endothelial damage markers of soluble thrombomodulin, soluble P-selectin (p < 0.05 vs. normal), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and tissue factor were elevated in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome patients. The soluble E-selectin was elevated only in the patients with both heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (p < 0.05 vs. normal). Levels of soluble L-selectin and von Willebrand factor were not different from normals. The pathogenesis of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome appears to be due to two distinct antibodies but associated with similar damage to the vascular endothelium in both diseases.