Despite the enormous amount of work focused on the pathogenesis and clinical manifestations of the Hughes or anti-phospholipid syndrome (APS), there is little published on management. Usually, the diagnosis of APS is made after the first thrombotic event, when a thrombophilia screen is performed. These patients have a high risk of recurrent thromboses and current therapy centres on the use of thromboprophylaxis with warfarin. However, a number of clinical questions keep recurring: do arterial and venous thrombosis require the same intensity of anti-coagulation? When should warfarin be stopped? Should patients who develop thrombosis when other risk factors (oral contraceptive pill, prolonged resting etc.) are present be treated like those without any risk factors but the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies (aPL)? How to manage a patient with recurrent thrombosis despite a high intensity anti-coagulation (International normalized ratio (INR) between 3.0-4.0)? Since many of the patients with aPL are fertile women, a substantial group of patients are diagnosed after recurrent pregnancy loss. Low-dose aspirin for those patients without previous thrombosis and aspirin plus heparin for patients with a history of thrombotic events are the current therapeutic options. However, some questions remain unanswered: does the addition of heparin to low-dose aspirin in women with first trimester recurrent miscarriage but without previous thrombosis improve foetal outcome over and above aspirin alone? Which is the best therapeutic regime during pregnancy for patients with aPL-associated stroke? When should high-dose intravenous gammaglobulin be considered? Finally, very little is known about the risk of thrombosis in individuals positive for aPL but still free of thrombosis. Should these individuals receive any treatment? If so, which one? In this review we attempt to address some of these questions taking into account available data from retrospective and prospective studies and our own clinical experience.