OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of anti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibodies (anti-beta2-GPI) in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and to assess their association with and predictive value for the clinical classification criteria of the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS). METHODS: One hundred thirty-three consecutive patients with SLE were recruited from 2 lupus clinics in the University of Toronto. Serum and plasma samples were tested for IgG anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL), prolonged partial thromboplastin time (PTT), a panel of lupus anticoagulant (LAC) assays, and anti-beta2-GPI (IgG, IgM, IgA). Normal ranges for the assays were established using 129 healthy controls. A literature review from 1992 to 2000 was performed using beta2-GPI, SLE, APS, thrombosis, and recurrent pregnancy loss as key search words. RESULTS: The distribution of anti-beta2-GPI antibodies (of any isotype) in each group were as follows: all patients with SLE, 36.8%; SLE with clinical features of APS, 40.4%; SLE without clinical features of APS, 34.9%; and healthy controls, 3%. The positive predictive values of prolonged PTT, IgG aCL, and anti-beta2-GPI for at least one clinical feature of APS in SLE were 59.3, 50.0, and 38.8%, respectively. There were 27 patients with SLE who had antibodies to beta2-GPI but a normal PTT and negative aCL and LAC. Six (20.7%) of these had a history of thrombosis and/or recurrent pregnancy loss. Twelve studies (including ours) were identified in which patient groups were similar and the same antibody isotype was measured. No agreement was apparent after reviewing the literature regarding an association of anti-beta2-GPI IgG and clinical features of APS in patients with SLE. CONCLUSION: Antibodies to beta2-GPI were frequently seen (35%) in our SLE population. The prevalence of anti-beta2-GPI was similar in those with (19/47) and without (39/86) APS. Anti-beta2-GPI did, however, identify 6 patients with clinical features of APS who were negative for aCL and prolonged PTT. Our results indicate that anti-beta2-GPI may provide additional information for the diagnosis of APS in SLE, but do not supercede other established assays. However, when we attempted to place our results in the context of other reports, the literature review revealed that secondary diagnoses of patient groups and assay techniques are too variable among different investigators to allow useful comparison. Thus, no conclusions could be drawn regarding anti-beta3-GPI and clinical features of secondary APS in SLE.