OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the prevalence of thrombophilic risk factors known to induce intravascular clotting and to assess their relationship with ischemic manifestations in giant cell arteritis (GCA). METHODS: Eighty consecutive patients with established GCA were included: 36 with isolated temporal arteritis (TA), 14 with isolated polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR), and 30 with TA and PMR. Forty-four patients (67%) had ischemic phenomena due to GCA. Twelve patients (15%) had thrombotic events unrelated to GCA (6 strokes, 5 deep venous thrombosis, and 1 myocardial infarction). A control group of 100 age- and sex-matched individuals without autoimmune disease, bleeding disorders, thrombosis, or clinical picture of TA or PMR also was analyzed. All participants were tested for the antiphospholipid antibody (aPL) profile, protein C, protein S, antithrombin activity, factor V Leiden mutation, and prothrombin gene G20210A mutation. We also studied fibrinolysis parameters: plasminogen, tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) antigen, t-PA activity, type-1 plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) antigen, PAI-1 activity, and the 4G/5G polymorphism of the promoter region of the PAI-1 gene. RESULTS: Eleven patients (18%) tested positive for lupus anticoagulant, 24 (30%) for anticardiolipin antibodies, 9 (11%) for anti-beta 2-glycoprotein I antibodies, and 29 (36%) for antiprothrombin antibodies. No relationship was found between these autoantibodies and ischemic manifestations. None of the patients had decreased protein C, protein S or antithrombin activity. Two patients and 2 controls were heterozygous for factor V Leiden, and only 1 patient and 2 controls were heterozygous for the prothrombin gene G20210A mutation. No statistically significant correlation was found between any thrombophilic factor and GCA-related or GCA-unrelated ischemic events. CONCLUSION: GCA patients have a high prevalence of aPL that is not related to ischemic manifestations. Moreover, GCA-related or GCA-unrelated ischemic manifestations do not appear to be due to congenital thrombophilic risk factors. Semin Arthritis Rheum 31:12-20.