 OBJECTIVE: To analyze the results and complications of ovulation induction therapy (OIT) in women with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and/or the antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). METHODS: A retrospective study of 21 women followed in a single tertiary-referral French center who underwent 114 OIT cycles with or without in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVFET). RESULTS: Before OIT, SLE was present in 6 women, APS in 3, SLE-related APS in 3, and discoid lupus in 1. Eight women had no identified disease and underwent 36 cycles of OIT. Diagnosis (SLE, n = 3; primary APS, n = 5) was made after OIT complication: spontaneous abortion (n = 5), SLE flare (n = 2), and thrombophlebitis (n = 1). Five women with known disease intentionally concealed their history from their gynecologists and underwent 34 cycles. Forty-four cycles were planned in 11 women, in 3 of them after complications of prior OIT performed without particular therapy and monitoring. Eighteen pregnancies occurred, which ended in 9 live births, 4 fetal deaths, and 5 embryonic losses. The pregnancy rate was higher with gonadotropin and/or gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog (GnRHa) (25% of cycles) than with clomiphene (4% of cycles, P <.0001). When the gynecologists did not know the underlying disease, three-quarters of pregnancies induced by OIT with IVFET ended in embryonic losses or fetal deaths. In contrast, 6 of 7 pregnancies induced by planned OIT with IVFET ended in live births (P <.0001). Phlebothromboses were observed only with gonadotropin treatment. The SLE flare rate was higher with gonadotropin and/or GnRHa (27% of cycle) than with clomiphene (6%, NS). It also was higher (30%) when the gynecologists did not know the underlying disease than in the planned procedures (10%, NS). CONCLUSIONS: The OIT may precipitate SLE or APS. A careful review of the patient's history and appropriate laboratory tests should be undertaken before OIT. Clomiphene complications are rare. When gonadotropins are prescribed, preventive anti-inflammatory therapy should be considered in women with SLE, in addition to heparin and/or anti-aggregant therapy in patients with asymptomatic anti-phospholipid antibodies or prior thrombotic events.