OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to better characterize valve disease in systemic lupus erythematosus and to determine its association with antiphospholipid antibodies. BACKGROUND: Estimates of the prevalence of valve disease in systemic lupus erythematosus have been higher in autopsy series than in clinical studies using transthoracic echocardiography. Antiphospholipid antibodies have been suggested to be a primary pathogenetic factor. METHODS: Transesophageal echocardiography was performed on 1) 54 patients with lupus erythematosus, 22 of them with (group I) and 32 without (group II) antiphospholipid antibody; 2) on 10 patients with antiphospholipid syndrome (group III); and 3) on 35 normal subjects (group IV). RESULTS: Patients in groups I and III had similar types and concentrations of antibodies. Leaflet thickening was found in 50% of group I, 47% of group II, 10% of group III and 9% of group IV patients (group I or II vs. group III or IV, p < 0.03). Leaflet thickening in patients with lupus erythematosus was diffuse; it usually involved the mitral and aortic valves and was associated with valve regurgitation (73%) or valve masses (50%). Valve masses were observed in 41% of group I, 25% of group II, 10% of group III and in none of group IV patients (group I or II vs. group IV, p < 0.002). Most valve masses in patients with lupus erythematosus were located near the base on the atrial side of the mitral valve or on the vessel side of the aortic valve, had variable size (0.2 to 0.85 cm2), shape and echodensity. Valve regurgitation was observed in 64% of group I, 59% of group II, 10% of group III and 20% of group IV patients (group I or II vs. group III or IV, p < 0.006). Moderate or severe regurgitant lesions were noted in 27% of group I and 25% of group II patients. CONCLUSIONS: Lupus erythematosus valve disease is frequent (74%) regardless of the presence or absence of antiphospholipid antibodies. Therefore antiphospholipid antibodies may not be a primary pathogenetic factor. The characteristic appearance of leaflet thickening and masses in patients with lupus erythematosus may be unique.