Some disease manifestations are associated with serum antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in what has been termed antiphospholipid syndrome (aPLS). There are patients with aPLS who do not have SLE or any other illness who have been grouped under the term primary antiphospholipid syndrome (PAPS). However, patients with diverse infections, notably syphilis, may have aPL but do not develop the associated clinical manifestations. This has been attributed, at least in part, to the immunochemical features of their aPL, including the requirement for beta 2-glycoprotein-I (beta 2GP-I) for binding of aPL to phospholipids, but these have not been studied in sera from patients with PAPS. By ELISA we studied 95 sera from 17 patients with PAPS and 100 sera from clinically normal individuals for IgG and IgM antibodies to the main anionic and zwitterionic phospholipids and their related compounds, phosphatidic acid (PA) and synthetic phosphorylcholine (PRC). beta 2GP-I was present, either in newborn calf serum (NBCS) or purified, to block wells and to dilute samples, or was substituted by 0.3% gelatin. Inhibition studies with phospholipid micelles were used to confirm reactivities with the corresponding phospholipids. All 17 patients had IgG and 11 had IgM antibodies to cardiolipin. Antibodies to anionic phospholipids were primarily IgG whereas those to zwitterionic phospholipids were mainly, and often exclusively, IgM. We found a statistically significant difference in the mean levels of antibodies to all anionic phospholipids except aPTS, and to the haptene PA (P < 0.001) between patients and controls. The difference between levels of IgM antibodies to zwitterionic phospholipids was statistically significant with sphingomyelin (P < 0.001) and the haptene (P < 0.001). Levels of most IgG and most IgM aPL correlated significantly among them. The pattern and titers of reactivity are variable between patients, but stable within each patient. Requirement of beta 2GP-I for this reactivity was not an all-or-nothing phenomenon in individual sera. In general, as in lupus sera, antibodies to anionic phospholipids require that this cofactor be present coating the ELISA plates, whereas those to zwitterionic phospholipids do not. It would appear that patients with PAPS have polyclonal mixtures of antibodies that react with various phospholipids and have different requirements for beta 2GP-I for such reactivity.