Endogenous generation of nitric oxide (NO) plays an important role in the regulation of cardiovascular and inflammatory responses. This mediator is synthesized by a family of enzymes collectively known as NO synthase. Several isoforms of this enzyme have been identified and can be grouped as constitutive or inducible. Increased production of NO is reported in several inflammatory disorders, such as sepsis, arthritis, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), and antiphospholipid syndrome. In addition, NO upregulates cyclo-oxygenase-2 and synthesis of several other inflammatory cytokines. Inflammation and thrombotic complications are usually associated with malignancy. Earlier reports indicate the upregulation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), C-reactive protein (CRP), and tissue factor (TF) in patients with malignancy. To determine the relationship between inflammatory cytokines and NO in cancer patients with hypercoagulable states, baseline plasma samples from 160 patients with confirmed malignancy and hypercoagulable state were analyzed for NO levels. A chemical method based on a chemiluminescent reaction between NO and ozone using a highly sensitive gas phase NO analyzer was used. CRP, TF, and TNF-alpha were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay methods. Of the 160 patients who were plasma tested, the baseline NO levels ranged from 13.7 to 98.6 microM (63.1+/-15.9 microM, mean+/-SD) in contrast to age-matched control, which ranged from 9.1 to 34.6 microM (19.8+/-6.2 microM, mean+/-SD, n=138). Cancer patients also showed marked variations in the NO levels. Eighteen of 60 cancer patients exhibited greater than 60 microM NO levels. The CRP, TNF-alpha and TF were also significantly elevated. A correlation between CRP (r(2)=0.73) and NO levels was noted in cancer patients with hypercoagulable state. These data suggest that the pathogenesis associated with malignancy/hypercoagulable state is associated with an inflammatory component. In addition, the observed hemodynamic changes in some of the cancer patients may be due to increased NO production.