The purpose of this study was to evaluate inherited and acquired prothrombotic risk factors among children with malignancies who have thrombosis and emphasize the importance of inherited prothrombotic risk factors. Thirty-seven consecutive children with thrombosis and malignancy were included in this study. The patients were evaluated separately for time of development of thrombosis, insertion of a central venous line (CVL), history of L: -asparaginase usage, and recent infections. Prothrombotic risk factors such as factor V G1691A and prothrombin G20210A mutation, protein C, protein S, antithrombin III deficiencies, factor VIII and lipoprotein(a) elevation, and antiphospholipid antibodies were analyzed for all patients. Of 387 children with thrombosis, 37 (9.5%) had a malignancy. Thrombosis was detected in 9 patients at the time of diagnosis, during maintenance therapy in 25 patients, and after the discontinuation of treatment in 3 patients. One or two additional prothrombotic risk factors other than L: -asparaginase therapy and insertion of central venous lines were present in 20 of these patients (54%). It was found that eight patients had the factor V G1691A mutation in the heterozygote state. One of them had the factor V G1691A mutation associated with a history of infection and one patient had the factor V G1691A mutation associated with factor VIII elevation. One had the the prothrombin G20210A mutation in the heterozygote state, four had lipoprotein(a) elevation, two had factor VIII elevation, one had a decreased protein S level, one had a decreased protein C level, one had antiphospholipid positivity, and two had histories of infection. Malignancy is an important risk factor for the development of childhood thrombosis. However, the risk of thrombosis increases when accompanied by additional prothrombotic risk factors. For this reason, especially children with malignancy and at high risk for the development of thrombosis, such as those who have received L: -asparaginase or a replaced CVL during their therapy, might be screened for additional prothrombotic risk factors and appropriate measures might be taken to prevent the development of thrombosis.