Antiphospholipid syndrome is characterized by arterial or venous thrombosis, and the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL). APL are considered to be a cause of an acquired hypercoagulable state leading to stroke and transient ischemic attack (TIA). We examined the causes in 50 young patients with ischemic stroke. The most prevalent cause was atherosclerosis and the incidence of APS was 12.5%. APL comprise a heterogeneous group of autoantibodies, such as beta2-glycoprotein I dependent anticardiolipin antibody (beta2-GPIaCL), lupus anticoagulant (LA), and other antiphospholid-protein antibodies. We examined the incidence and the pathogenic role of antiphospholipid protein antibodies. The subjects comprised 250 patients (155 male, 95 females) with ischemic stroke, aged 26 to 92 years (mean 72 years). We measured beta2-GPI aCL, IgG aCL, LA, phosphatidyserine dependent antiprothrtombin antibody (PS-PT), antiphosphatidyl-serine antibody (PS), antiphosphatidyl-inositol antibody (PI) in each patient. The incidence of beta2-GPI aCL, IgG aCL, LA, phosphatidyserine, PS-PT, PS, and PI was 2.8%, 12%, 9.2%, 7.2%, 9.6%, and 8.8%, respectively. The incidence of young stroke patients under 50 years was 5.2%. Among 13 young stroke patients, 5 had SLE. Among 23 patients with LA., 18 (78%) patients had PS-PT. Anti-PS-PT antibody is closely related to LA. Antinuclear antibody was detected in 79% of the patients with aPS and/or aPI. We compared the carotid ultrasonographic findings in positive aPI or aPS patients with those in negative ones. Increased IMT, plaque score and carotid stenosis were more common in aPI and aPS-positive patients than in negative ones Three of 5 patients who showed positive beta2-GPI, aCL and LA, simulataneously, had sysyemic lupus erythematosus as an immulological background. Two of 3 patients with PI and/or PS and beta2-GPI and/or LA were patients with SLE. Antiphospholipid antibody was considered to be a risk factor of stroke, especially in SLE and/or young female patients. The incidence of lupus anticoagulant is more common than beta2-GPI aCL in ischemic stroke. In SLE patients with stroke, multi-antiphospholipid-protein antibodies was inclined to be present. LA is closely related to ant-PS-PT and aPI and aPS are associated with anti-nuclear antibody and precipitation of atherosclerosis.