Antiphospholipd syndrome (APS) is a disease characterised by venous and arterial thrombosis or recurrent foetal loss, which are associated with antiphospholipid antibodies or/and lupus anticoagulant. Clinical symptoms ofAPS are assocciated with presence of noninflammatory thrombosis ocluding arteries or venes. Symptoms of APS are often very dramatic what can be illustrated by the presented case of 40 year patient. At the age of 25 after a miscarriage the patient developed tetraparesis and motor aphasia in the course of thrombosis in central nervous system vessels. In physical examination besides neurological symptoms reticular livedo was found on the trunk and limbs. Serological tests have revealed presence of high titre of IgG and IgM anticardiolipin antibodies and lupus anticoagulant (LA). CT examination revealed hypodensic foci in left parietal lobe, and abnormal EEG findings were observed in fronto-temporal leads of left hemisphera of brain. At that point the patient did not meet the criteria of connective tissue diseases, including lupus. The diagnosis of primary APS was suggested. The patient received anti-aggregation treatment and also immunosuppressive drugs (azathioprine and prednison) due to progression of neurological manifestations. 3 years later, the second pregnancy ended in the 27th week with intrauterine fetal death. During the 3rd pregnancy, 2 years afterwards, the patient was treated with heparin, aspirin and intravenous immunoglobulin. The pregnancy finished with a successful delivery at term, the newborn was in good condition. During the following pregnancy the symptoms of preeclampsia occurred at 36/37th week but the newborn was delivered in a good condition after a caesarean section. At the age of 36 patient developed ischemic brain stroke with left-side hemiparesis inspite of anti-aggregation and immunosupressive (prednison and azathioprine) treatment. At that time homogenic type antinuclear antibodies (ANA) 1:2560, anti-beta2-glycoprotein antibodies (beta2-GPI), aCL antibodies in medium titer and thrombocytopenia were found. The patient was treated with heparin, cyclophosphamide and methyloprednisolon intravenously. During rehabilitation process gradual improvement of cognitive functions, speech and motorical functions was observed. Recently high titre of ANA and recurent thrombocytopenia < 100,000/mm3 were present. Maybe during the further follow-up, 14 years after the first symptoms of APS, the patient will develop full blown symptoms of SLE.