 PURPOSE: We evaluated the prevalence and progression of Libman-Sacks endocarditis in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and any association between this valvulopathy and their clinical and laboratory characteristics. METHODS: Doppler echocardiography was performed in 342 consecutive patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (297 females and 45 males). The clinical and laboratory data were recorded. Patients were reevaluated after a follow-up period of 4 years. RESULTS: Libman-Sacks endocarditis was found in 38 patients (11%). In 24 of 38 patients, mitral valve involvement was found, resulting in regurgitation in all (mild in 18, moderate in 4, and severe in 2), whereas stenosis co-occurred with regurgitation in 9 patients (mild in 6 and moderate in 3). Thirteen (34%) of 38 patients had aortic valve involvement; 11 had regurgitation (mild) and 8 had stenosis (mild), coexistent with regurgitation in 6 of them. One patient had mild tricuspid regurgitation. A significant association was found between Libman-Sacks endocarditis and disease duration and activity, thromboses, stroke, thrombocytopenia, anticardiolipin antibodies, and antiphospholipid syndrome. During the follow-up period, 252 of 342 patients were reevaluated echocardiographically. Among the 38 patients with Libman-Sacks vegetations, 5 with mild mitral regurgitation at the beginning developed moderate (n=4) and severe mitral regurgitation (n=1), 2 patients with mitral stenosis (mild in 1 and moderate in 1) developed severe mitral regurgitation, and 2 patients with mild aortic regurgitation developed moderate and severe mitral regurgitation, whereas a significant deterioration of aortic stenosis was found. Two patients who were candidates for surgery died. Among the 213 patients without vegetations at the beginning, 8 developed new Libman-Sacks lesions. CONCLUSIONS: Libman-Sacks vegetations can be found in approximately 1 of 10 patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, and they are associated with lupus duration, disease activity, anticardiolipin antibodies, and antiphospholipid syndrome manifestations. A progression of valve lesions may occur during long-term follow-up.