A prothrombotic and hemorrhagic state can separately manifest in one patient and can potentially cause several diagnostic problems. We report an intriguing case as an example of a potential hemostasis-based diagnostic dilemma. A 29-year-old female patient presented with a personal history of menorrhagia and other mucosal bleeding and renal ovarian thrombosis. Previous investigations had uncovered several diagnostic anomalies, including von Willebrand disease (VWD), factor V Leiden (FVL), antiphospholipid syndrome, and thrombocytopaenia. Previous therapy in this patient included heparin and warfarin for the thrombosis and desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) and antifibrinolytic therapy for surgical management. Subsequent laboratory testing with fresh samples consistently confirmed an equivocal (borderline normal/abnormal) level of von Willebrand factor (VWF) and FVL with activated protein C resistance (APCR). A patient sample, differentially labeled according to the tests being performed, was later distributed for blind testing to participants within several modules of the RCPA Quality Assurance Program (QAP). Most participants reported a low level of VWF consistent with possible mild Type 1 VWD, and most (but not all) reported a positive finding for APCR. All participants correctly reported the sample as heterozygous for the FVL mutation, negative for the Prothrombin gene mutation G20210A, and heterozygous for the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) mutation C677T. Interestingly, a significant number of laboratories performing Protein S testing using clot-based procedures also identified a false Protein S deficiency. In conclusion, this exercise showed how, either depending on the clinical review and specific laboratory investigation and tests performed, a pro-bleeding diagnosis (of either VWD or thrombocytopenia) or pro-thrombophilia risk (Antiphospholipid Syndrome or FVL/APCR or false Protein S deficiency) could potentially and differentially arise in the one patient.