 BACKGROUND/AIM: Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune disorder clinically characterized by arterial or venous thrombosis and/or specific obstetric complications and presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) in the serum. It occurs in 0.3% of pregnant women, while 1% of them have two spontaneous abortions. The aim of this study was to analyze the frequency of biphospholipid antibodies in pregnant women with recurrent spontaneous abortions. METHODS: We analyzed 60 pregnant women who had two or more recurrent miscarriages. The control group included 60 healthy pregnant women. We analyzed titres of anticardiolipin (aCL) IgG and/or IgM with high titres (> 20 U/mL), lupus anticoagulant (LAC) antibodies and anti-beta-2 glycoprotein (b2-GP1) IgG as well as parameters of coagulation status of pregnant women. RESULTS: Analyzing Spearman's rank correlation coefficient in a group of affected patients, we noticed a slightly positive correlation of lupus anticoagulants (LAC) with aCL antibodies of both classes, while the correlation with b2GP1 IgG was negative. Both classes of aCL antibodies and anti-b2GP1 IgG were in a discrete positive correlation with the given variables. In the control group, there was a lack of consistency in correlation of the study variables with LAC-aCl IgG, compared to the affected patients, and there was a standard negative coefficient of correlation with anti-b2GP1 IgG. The correlation ratio of anti-b2GP1 IgG was negative for all studied test parameters. Analysis of hemostatic parameters showed a statistically significant difference in the concentration of fibrinogen (p < 0.01) and thrombocyte count (p < 0.05) between the study and the control group of pregnant women. Lower mean values of fibrinogen (2.90 +/- 0.45 g/L) and lower thrombocyte count [(179.20 +/- 6.00) x 10(9)] were found in the study group of pregnant women with secondary infertility compared to the mean values of fibrinogen (3.60 +/- 0.55 g/L) and thrombocyte count [(236.05 +/- 5.10) x 10(9)] in the control group. Activated partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin time were statistically significantly prolonged (p < 0.05) in pregnant women with spontaneous abortions compared to controls, suggest anticoagulant activity. CONCLUSION: In pregnant women with spontaneous abortions compared to healthy pregnant women slightly positive correlation of LAC with aCL antibodies of both classes, as well as a positive correlation of aCL antibodies with anti-b2GP1 IgG exist. On the other hand, hemostatic parameters values suggest an anticoagulatnt status in the blood of pregnant women with spontaneous abortions.