PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to determine the clinical relevance and the diagnostic significance of positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA) without identified antigenic target by the usual characterization technique. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Retrospective study conducted in the Laboratory of Immunology of Habib Bourguiba Hospital (Sfax, Tunisia) during 18months. The inclusion criteria were the presence of an ANA titer greater or equal to 1/320 with negative characterization result. ANA screening was performed by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) on Hep2 cells. Each positive serum was tested by IIF on Crithidia luciliae (anti-native DNA) and by immunodot (anti-nucleosome, anti-histone, anti-Sm, anti-RNP, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-Scl 70, anti-PM-Scl, anti-Jo1, anti-PCNA and anti-ribosomal protein). Sera of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), myositis, and scleroderma patients were tested for anti-Ku, anti-PL7, anti-PL12 and anti-Ro-52 using dot myositis. RESULTS: Sera of 90 patients were studied: 18 men and 72 women (average age: 44years). Drug-induced ANA was found in eight patients. The most frequent clinical symptoms were joint (56.7%), cutaneous (54.4%) and constitutional symptoms (45.6%). The diagnosis of an autoimmune disease was suspected in 49 patients (54.5%) and confirmed in 30 (33.3%) including 20 cases of connective tissue disease: myositis (n=6), scleroderma (n=5), Sjögren's syndrome (n=3), SLE (n=4), rheumatoid arthritis (n=6) and antiphospholipid syndrome (n=4). Other autoimmune diseases were less frequent. The anti-Ku antibody was detected in the majority of patients with connective tissue disease. The diagnosis of non-autoimmune diseases was established in 25.5% of patients. Eighteen patients (20%) had no diagnosis orientation. CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated the diagnostic value of the presence of ANA even in the absence of known antigenic target, confirmed the role of the IIF as "gold standard" test for ANA screening, and suggested the usefulness of the addition of Ku antigen in the immunodot classic profile.