A 25-year-old woman complained of anasarca and was admitted to Sakura National hospital on the presumptive diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome with 10.7 g of 24-hour urinary protein. At first, lupus nephritis with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome was suspected because of prolongation of APTT, existence of lupus anticoagulant and elevation of serum anticardiolipin antibody titer (IgM) in addition to positive ANA, lymphocytopenia and the biologically false positive test for syphilis (BFPTS). On day 28 of hospitalization, renal biopsy findings revealed severe endocapillary cell damage, such as swelling and proliferation of endothelial cells, fragmentation and double contour of the basement membrane walls, which were located only in the capillary lumens with a few thrombi. Immunofluorescent micrography revealed the absence of specific immunoglobulin or complement deposit. Therefore, the diagnosis of lupus nephritis was negated as these findings were suggestive of characteristic glomerulopathy due to primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. She was treated initially with oral prednisolone 60 mg and intravenous infusion of heparin 20,000 units daily. Moreover, cyclophosphamide 750 mg was administered intravenously as pulse therapy on day 13 as her serum level of CH50 had fallen suddenly, and hemodialysis was necessary because her renal function had deteriorated and she was suffering from cough and orthopnea with overhydratin. After the combined therapy, BFPTS disappeared and APTT returned to the normal range: dialysis treatment was not required further after the 4th hemodialysis. Thereafter, renal function improved and complete remission of nephrotic syndrome was obtained. This patient was a case of primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome in which endothelial cell damage was located exclusively in the capillary lumens and pulse cyclophosphamide therapy in addition to prednisolone and anticoagulant was effective. We present this instructive case to promote understanding of the pathogenesis of primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.