OBJECTIVE: Initial studies showed that passive immunization with human immunoglobulin G fractions containing antiphospholipid antibodies can result in murine fetal loss. We intended to use the murine model to study mechanisms of fetal loss associated with antiphospholipid antibodies. However, we have since found variable effects of antiphospholipid antibodies on murine pregnancy. The objective of this study was to determine the consistency of murine pregnancy loss from antiphospholipid antibody containing immunoglobulin G fraction. STUDY DESIGN: Pregnant C3H/HeN (mated with C57B1/6 males) and BALB/c (mated with BALB/c males) mice were passively immunized with antiphospholipid antibody containing human immunoglobulin G fraction from 20 women with antiphospholipid syndrome. The mice received either a single dose of 10 to 30 mg on day 12 of pregnancy or 10 mg per day on days 12 to 14 of gestation. Some mice receiving each dose of immunoglobulin G fraction were bled to confirm serum levels of anticardiolipin antibodies. Mice were killed on day 15 and the fetal status was determined. RESULTS: Overall, passive immunization with individual antiphospholipid antibody containing immunoglobulin G fractions resulted in 801 live pups (75%), 232 fetal deaths (22%), and 38 resorptions (3%) in 131 mice. The effect of immunoglobulin G fractions from individual patients was highly variable. Immunoglobulin G fraction from eight women resulted in high rates of fetal loss. However, in spite of high levels of anticardiolipin antibodies, fetal outcome was normal in mice immunized with immunoglobulin G fraction from the majority of women. The rate of fetal death did not uniformly increase with increasing doses of immunoglobulin G fraction and was unrelated to the donor's medical history. Fetal outcome was similar for both C3H/HeN and BALB/c mice. CONCLUSIONS: Human antiphospholipid antibodies have variable effects on murine pregnancy outcome. Characterization of antiphospholipid antibodies that do and do not cause murine fetal loss may provide insight into epitopes relevant to fetal loss associated with antiphospholipid syndrome.