The antiphospholipid syndrome is characterized by clinical evidence of arterial or venous thrombosis, thrombocytopaenia, recurrent fetal loss and repeated positivity of antiphospholipid autoantibodies. The association of antiphospholipid syndrome with the development of adrenal failure has been reported in more than 40 patients in the last 20 years, mostly due to bilateral cortical haemorrhage or thrombosis of adrenal vessels. The presence of antibodies against adrenal cortex was never documented in these patients. Here we report a case of recurrent thrombophlebitis, acute adrenal failure, and chronic hepatitis occurring in a young man found to have antiphospholipid antibodies and lupus anticoagulant. Autoantibodies against adrenal cortex were detected and abdominal ultrasonography showed morphologically normal adrenals. Mild thrombocytopaenia, Coomb's positive anaemia, increase in alanine- and aspartate-aminotransferases and increase in urinary protein excretion were found. Autoantibodies against liver/kidney microsomes were positive and liver biopsy was compatible with autoimmune hepatitis. The patient was treated with cortisone acetate, fludrocortisone and warfarin. Dilated cardiomyopathy was revealed one year later and coronarography did not document any occlusive coronary disease. Three years later, titres of autoantibodies, including those directed towards the adrenal cortex, were increased and others, previously absent, were detected. Nevertheless, the patient's clinical conditions seemed unchanged. At this time, an abdominal CT scan showed adrenal dysmorphisms with bilateral annular calcifications and central hypodensities suggesting previous bilateral adrenal haematomas. The hypercoagulable state that occurs in antiphospholipid syndrome can induce a localized inflammatory response generated by tissue injury, with a consequent release of intracellular antigens and antibodies production. Consequently, tissue-specific autoantibodies positivity may persist until the cells involved in antigen production are completely destroyed.