Differentiation of essential thrombocythemia (ET) from thrombocythemias occurring in various subtypes of chronic myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs) is controversial, because of the lack of uniform clinical and morphological criteria. A retrospective clinicopathologic study was performed on 375 patients presenting with a MPD and a platelet count exceeding 500 x 10(9/)l. For comparison 35 patients with reactive thrombocytosis (RT) and five patients with a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS-5q(-) syndrome) were enrolled into this study. In addition to a complete clinicopathological work-up, procedures included histochemical and immunological staining techniques and morphometry of bone marrow biopsies for proper evaluation of megakaryocytes (CD61) and erythroid precursors (Ret40f). Because of the high patient's age on admission, relative survival rates with corresponding disease-specific loss of life expectancy were calculated. Analysis of clinical and morphological characteristics, in particular megakaryopoiesis revealed features which enabled a clear-cut distinction between thrombocythemias in MPDs and thrombocythemic states in MDS. This rationale proved to be most important for the diagnostic discrimination of the 33 patients with initial (prefibrotic) stages of idiopathic myelofibrosis (IMF) from ET (40 patients). A new set of relevant criteria for the diagnosis of IMF with special regard to early stages and its distinction from ET has been proposed. Hemorrhagic episodes were more frequently observed in ET than in thrombocythemias associated with polycythemia vera (PV). Computation of specific loss of life expectancy revealed two extremes: thrombocythemia in CML (81%) and ET (3%), whereas thrombocythemias in PV and IMF did not show a significantly different life loss (19-22%). The revised criteria for ET, PV and IMF are reliable by taking histopathological features from bone marrow biopsies into consideration, particularly for the diagnosis of ET and its differentiation from thrombocythemias as a presenting symptom accompanying the various subtypes of MPDs.