Thrombocytopenia is a substantial clinical problem for patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Cytokine treatment for granulocytopenia and anaemia may further reduce the platelet counts. We studied serum thrombopoietin levels (S-TPO) in 52 patients with MDS and 96 healthy controls and related the results to clinical and morphological variables. S-TPO was also assessed after treatment with granulocyte-CSF (G-CSF) and erythropoietin (EPO) in 30 of these patients. S-TPO in MDS was not a normally distributed variable; mean value was 394 pg/ml, SD +/-831 and median value 123 (12-5000 pg/ml). The controls showed lower S-TPO levels than the patients (median 78 pg/ml, P = 0.003) whereas no differences between the MDS subgroups were observed (P = 0.86). Patients with ringed sideroblastic anaemia (RARS) showed the highest platelet counts and higher S-TPO levels than the controls (P = 0.005). No association between platelet counts and S-TPO levels was found in the patients (P = 0.67). TPO levels were generally low in patients with refractory anaemia with an excess of blasts (RAEB), but very high levels were found in five patients. Patients with a high transfusion need had higher S-TPO levels, whereas bone marrow blast counts, cellularity or megakaryocytes showed no correlation with S-TPO. Patients with 5q- showed lower TPO levels than the other patients, indicating that thrombopoietin is not a mediator of thrombocytosis in these cases. Treatment with G-CSF + EPO significantly reduced the platelet counts (P = 0.0002), but this change was not related to significant changes in S-TPO levels or morphology. Patients with RARS and thrombocytosis who normalized their platelet counts showed a concomitant reduction in S-TPO. This may suggest that the increased platelet counts observed in RARS may be caused by increased S-TPO levels. In conclusion, our study shows that platelet, megakaryocyte and thrombopoietin regulation is rather complex in myelodysplastic syndromes and that spontaneous or induced thrombocytopenia are not usually mirrored by increased S-TPO levels.