HIV-related bone marrow changes are consistent with myelodysplastic features (MDF). Their pathogenesis may differ from primary myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and is associated with various factors including the virus itself or the antiretroviral therapy. In order to evaluate the differences between HIV-related MDF and MDS, the morphological changes in peripheral blood and bone marrow, cytogenetic analysis and the response to anaemia treatment were studied in 158 HIV+ patients with haemophilia and the results were compared with those of 61 patients with primary MDS (31 with RA, 10 with RARS, 11 with RAEB, three with RAEB-t and six with CMML). The eligibility criteria for patients with MDS were primary MDS, Hb levels < 10 g dL(-1), and no significant organ disease. The peripheral blood and bone marrow examination revealed MDF in 44 HIV-infected haemophilic patients (27.8%). The median time from seroconversion was 12.5 years and the mean time under AZT therapy was 44.1 months. Nineteen of these patients (43.1%) had Hb levels < 10 g dL(-1), while neutropenia and thrombocytopenia were observed in 29.5% and 25%, respectively. Every patient of this study with Hb < 10 g dL(-1) received erythropoietin (Epo). There were statistically significant morphological alterations between HIV-related MDF and MDS: hypocellularity, plasmatocytosis and eosinophilia were more pronounced in HIV haemophiliacs with MDF, while dysplasia of erythroblasts, megakaryocytes and granulocytes was more frequent in MDS patients. No HIV haemophilic patient with MDF had more than 5% blasts in the bone marrow nor did any develop RAEB or acute leukaemia during the period of this study. The cytogenetic analysis was normal in HIV-infected patients with haemophilia whereas 42.6% of patients with MDS had an abnormal karyotype. Complete erythroid response was achieved with Epo administration in 84.2% of HIV+ haemophilic patients with anaemia compared to 19.7% of patients with MDS. These data suggest that bone marrow changes in long-term HIV patients have different characteristics from primary MDS and constitute the entity for which the name HIV-myelopathy has been proposed in the literature.