PURPOSE: Myelodysplastic syndromes are clonal hematologic disorders, expanded from myeloid stem cells. A primitive immunologic disorder is discussed. This hypothesis could explain a non-casual association with systemic diseases. The aim of our study is to test this hypothesis. METHODS: We retrospectively investigated the data of 60 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (group I) hospitalized in our unit from 1990 to 1999. The frequency of systemic disorders was screened and compared to controls (group II). Group II consisted of 120 patients matched for age and sex and hospitalized in the same hospital during the same period. RESULTS: Sixty patients were included (mean age: 83 years old). Myelodysplastic syndrome subtypes were refractory anemia with excessive blasts (52%), refractory anemia (43%) and sideroblastic anemia (5%). Fourteen cases of systemic manifestations were reported in group I (23%) and five in the controls (4%) (P < 0.0001). Systemic manifestations in group I included vasculitis in six cases (42%), polyarthritis in three cases (21%), systemic amyloidosis AA in two cases (14%), relapsing polychondritis in one case, pyoderma gangrenosum in one case and celiac disease associated with a systemic granulomatosis in one case. In the controls, vasculitis was present in four cases and polyarthritis in one. Median age at onset of myelodysplastic syndrome was not influenced by the association with systemic disorders which, in return, have not influenced the myelodysplastic syndromes' subtypes. Myelodysplastic syndromes succeeded to systemic manifestations in 71.4% of cases and could not be attributed to immunosuppressive therapy. CONCLUSIONS: The association of myelodysplastic syndromes with systemic manifestations seems not to be casual. It raises the hypothesis of a primitive immunological disorder in both diseases. Moreover, the description of two cases of systemic amyloidosis and one case of pyoderma gangrenosum might suggest an additional disorder of macrophages or granular cells.