Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is currently one of the major obstacles for successful allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). GVHD results from a complex set of interactions between donor T cells and a variety of target tissues from the host. To gain a better understanding of the biology of the human hematopoietic system in GVHD patients, in the present study we have determined the progenitor cell content in bone marrow (BM) samples from BMT recipients, with and without GVHD, and followed their growth kinetics in Dexter-type long-term marrow cultures (LTMC). We have also assessed some aspects regarding the composition of the hematopoietic microenvironment developed in vitro. As compared to normal subjects, BMT recipients showed decreased numbers of myeloid, erythroid, and multipotent progenitor cells. Interestingly, progenitor levels were significantly lower in GVHD patients (7% of the levels in normal marrow) than in those without GVHD (44% of the levels in normal marrow). When marrow cells from BMT recipients were cultured in LTMC, hematopoiesis was sustained at lower levels and for shorter periods of time, as compared to cultures from normal subjects. The hematopoietic deficiencies observed in this in vitro system were also more pronounced in GVHD patients. In terms of the microenvironment elements, reduced numbers of fibroblastic progenitors and adherent stromal cells were observed in BMT recipients, as compared to normal subjects, who showed 7 colony-forming unit fibroblast (CFU-F)/10(5) marrow cells and 320,000 adherent cells in LTMC. Again, GVHD patients showed more severe deficiencies (0.16 CFU-F/10(5) marrow cells and 34,000 adherent cells in LTMC) than patients without GVHD (2 CFU-F/10(5) marrow cells and 122,000 adherent cells in LTMC). Our results demonstrate that the hematopoietic system of BMT recipients is impaired, both in terms of its in vitro composition and function, and that these deficiencies are clearly more pronounced in patients with GVHD than in those without GVHD. Finally, although the evidence is still preliminary, our results also indicate that the severity of the hematopoietic alterations may be greater in acute GVHD than in chronic GVHD.