OBJECTIVE: To explore the biological characteristics of the hematopoietic cells in myelodysplastic syndromes(MDS) and the relationship between the biological indices and the disease progressing. METHODS: R banding technique for karyotype analysis, in vitro semi-solid culture for CFU-GM growth patterns, flow cytometry after monoclonal antibody labeling for proliferation cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) expression, flow cytometry after in vitro bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation for cell cycle kinetics analysis, and X-linked HUMARA gene polymorphism assay for hematopoiesis clonality analysis were carried out in 37 MDS patients. RESULTS: 1. Cytogenetic abnormalities were detected in 31% of the MDS patients and AML transformation occurred in 2 of 9 with normal and 3 of 5 with abnormal chromosomal karyotypes. 2. The mean CFU-GM colony yield was decreased and cluster yield increased in the MDS patients. Disease progression in 6 of 9 with more CFU-GM cluster yields, while only 1 of 9 with either normal or no CFU-GM yields transformed into AML. 3. Percentages of PCNA-positive BMMNCs were significantly higher in MDS patients than in normal control (44.22% vs 26.82%, P < 0.01). RAEB/RAEB-t subtypes had significantly higher PCNA-positive cells (P < 0.01). 4. The mean BrdU labeling index of MDS marrow cells was lower (5.07%), the mean DNA synthesis time (Ts) and potential doubling time(Tpot) of MDS patients were longer than that of normal control (p < 0.01), and the increased Ts and T pot were related to the disease progression. 5. Monoclonal pattern of BMMNCs was detected in 5 of 7 heterozygous female RA patients and the other 2 were polyclonal hematopoiesis. All 3 RAEB and 1 MDS/AML were monoclonal hematopoiesis. CONCLUSION: With disease progressing and bone marrow blasts increasing, the biological nature of the hamatopoetic cells in MDS exhibited a tendency to transformation as follows: hematopoiesis converting into clonal, in vitro CFU-GM growth pattern approaching leukemic, PCNA expression increasing, and cell cycle prolonging.