In vitro studies on the functional integrity of the hematopoietic microenvironment in myelodysplasia have been controversial. Although some of them suggest that such a microenvironment is functionally normal, there is increasing evidence indicating that there are alterations in the function of microenvironment (adherent) cell layers from myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) marrow. Adherent cell layers developed in vitro, however, consist of a mixture of different cell types-mostly fibroblasts and macrophages-thus, it is not clear which cell type(s) is(are) functionally abnormal in this disorder. In order to address this issue, in the present study, we first assessed some functional properties of MDS-derived adherent cell layers, as a whole, and then we analyzed those same functional properties after separating these cells into two different populations: a fibroblast-enriched cell layer and a macrophage-enriched cell layer. When whole adherent layers from MDS patients were analyzed, no significant differences were observed, as compared to their normal counterparts, in terms of morphology and total cell number. A major difference, however, was observed when analyzing the production of the cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha). Indeed, adherent layers from MDS patients produced higher levels of these cytokines (2- and 22-fold, respectively), as compared to normal layers. When fibroblast- and macrophage-enriched cell layers were analyzed, a higher apoptotic index was observed in those derived from MDS marrow (4% of TUNEL-positive cells in normal fibroblast layers versus 27% in MDS-derived fibroblast layers; 7% of TUNEL-positive cells in normal macrophage layers versus 24% in MDS macrophage layers). Macrophages from MDS marrow produced significantly higher levels of TNF-alpha (nine-fold) than their normal counterparts. MDS-derived fibroblasts, on the other hand, produced higher levels of IL-6 (nine-fold), as compared to normal fibroblasts. Surprisingly, whereas normal fibroblasts showed a discrete production of TNF-alpha, we found a very high production of this cytokine in cultures of fibroblasts from MDS patients. In summary, in the present study we have demonstrated that, at least in vitro, both fibroblasts and macrophages from MDS bone marrow (BM) are functionally abnormal. Such abnormalities include an increased apoptotic index, as well as a high production of both IL-6 and TNF-alpha.