 BACKGROUND: Immunosuppression may benefit some patients with hypoplastic myelodysplasia (HMDS) and refractory anemia (RA), but its mechanism of action is still obscure. METHODS: Using flow cytometry, we studied Fas-receptor (Fas-R), Fas-ligand (Fas-L), and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) expression in CD34(+) cells and lymphocytes obtained from 11 HMDS and 20 RA patients. In colony assays and long-term cultures, the effects of Fas triggering, IFN-gamma blockade, or cyclosporine(CsA) on the growth of hematopoietic progenitors (colony-forming cells [CFC]) were determined. The effects of CsA at daily doses of 1-3 mg/kg for at least 3 months in HMDS patients were also studied. RESULTS: In basal conditions, committed and immature progenitor cells were found decreased in myelodysplastic (MDS) patients. No significant differences between HMDS and RA patients were detected. IFN-gamma-expressing CD4(+) cells were significantly increased in HMDS patients, whereas intracytoplasmic Fas-L expression was only borderline elevated in CD3(+) MDS cells. Increased numbers of CD34(+) cells expressing Fas-R were found in HMDS and RA patients. CFC and secondary CFC showed higher susceptibility to Fas-L-mediated inhibition and the blockade of IFN-gamma improved marrow primary, but not secondary, CFC growth. CsA added in vitro to patient's lymphocytes significantly decreased the number of IFN-gamma-expressing CD4(+) cells, but not Fas-L production. These effects were associated with increased colony formation. Similar to IFN-gammablockade, production of secondary CFC was not enhanced by CsA. Administration of CsA to patients resulted in prolonged partial hematologic improvement in 8 of 11 HMDS patients. CONCLUSIONS: Increased frequency of IFN-gamma producing CD4(+) cells supports the involvement of lymphocyte-mediated suppression of hematopoiesis in the development of cytopenia in MDS patients. The ability of CsA to decrease in vitro IFN-gamma production may improve hematopoietic function, explaining the beneficial effect of this agent in HMDS patients.