Detection of atypical megakaryocytes in bone marrow biopsies, especially in cases of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), chronic myeloproliferative disorders (CMPD) and acute leukemias, is facilitated by staining for markers such as Ulex europaeus agglutinin (UEA)-J, CD31, CD61 and von Willebrand factor (VWF), the latter being considered the most sensitive. Recently, LAT (linker for activation of T cells), a molecule involved in T-cell activation and platelet aggregation, was found to be expressed by megakaryocytes and platelets in tissue sections. We compared VWF and LAT immunoreactivity on megakaryocytes in 64 bone marrow biopsies from 12 normal controls (NC), and from patients with MDS (n=18), CMPD (n=21) and acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AML-M7, n=13). Immunostaining was performed on paraffin sections with polyclonal antibodies against VWF and LAT. Immunoreactivity was evaluated by counting positive megakaryocytes in 10 high-power fields, and values were compared using Student's t test for paired data. Both VWF and LAT predominantly stained the cytoplasm of megakaryocytes, although LAT was also recognizable on the cell membrane. In most biopsies, the immunoreactivity of the two antibodies was quite similar. No significant differences were noticed between the mean values of VWF+ and LAT+ megakaryocytes. However, in 22 cases (5 NC; 5 MDS; 6 CMPD; 6 AML-M7), the number of LAT+ megakaryocytes was at least 30% higher than VWF+cells, while in 3 cases opposite findings were found. In 3 AML-M7 cases, anti-LAT antibodies stained numerous megakaryocytes, but anti-VWF staining was practically negative; in another 5 AML-M7 cases, anti-LAT labeling was much stronger than anti-VWF staining. LAT represents a useful immunohistochemical marker for megakaryocytes in normal and pathological conditions. It seems to be expressed by megakaryocytes more than VWF in most cases and, particularly, in conditions associated with poorly differentiated megakaryocytes, such as acute megakaryocytic leukemias. The use of LAT staining should be recommended in association with other megakaryocyte markers in the study of bone marrow biopsies in cases of hematopoietic disorders.