Refractory anemia (RA) is the only myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) devoid of quantitative marrow diagnostic criteria. The diagnosis rests mainly on the subjective identification of qualitative abnormalities according to the French-American-British criteria (FAB) involving one or more bone marrow hematopoietic cell lineages. The occurrence of nonrandom chromosome abnormalities remains the hallmark of the disease and the only means of investigation which confirms the disease objectively. With the purpose in mind to further characterize RA among MDS, we have undertaken a prospective high resolution banding chromosome analyses of bone marrow cells in patients with primary refractory anemia (PRA) with the aim of defining a cytogenetic phenotype and of assessing the clinical relevance of clonal abnormalities at initial diagnosis. Of 39 patients consecutively referred for chromosome analyses with a diagnosis of RA according to the FAB criteria, 27 patients had PRA and fulfilled our criteria for adequate chromosome analyses. Median age was 68 years. Fourteen of 27 patients (52%) had clonal chromosomal abnormalities at diagnosis. None of the patients showed a complex karyotype; 9/14 (64%) had a mixture of normal and abnormal cells. Interstitial or terminal deletions, involving chromosomes 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, and 20, were found in 11/14 (79%) of the patients. Comparison of survival between patients with and without abnormalities showed no difference. The presence of clonal abnormalities did not predict transformation to acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML) nor was it associated with poor survival. In this study, patients with PRA were found to have a predominant pseudodiploid karyotypic pattern characterized by interstitial and/or terminal deletions as opposed to derivatives, specific and non-specific balanced translocations, or other structural and numerical abnormalities. We were unable to reveal any prognostic significance to the presence of these clonal abnormalities at initial diagnosis.