 OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence and clinical characteristics of hematologic malignancies occurring in a large series of patients diagnosed with cryoglobulinemia, and to study their association and overlap with autoimmune and/or chronic viral diseases. METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the occurrence of hematologic malignancies in 607 patients diagnosed with cryoglobulinemia in a single institution. Clinical, histologic, and serologic characteristics of patients were recorded on a protocol form. Hematologic malignancies were diagnosed according to the Revised European-American Lymphoma/World Health Organization classification criteria. RESULTS: Of the total cohort of 607 patients with cryoglobulinemia, we retrospectively identified 27 patients (5%) in whom a hematologic malignancy was diagnosed, including 24 (89%) lymphoproliferative and 3 (11%) myeloid malignancies. Fifteen (56%) were men and 12 (44%) women, with a median age at diagnosis of hematologic malignancy of 67 years (range, 44 to 88 years). The identified hematologic malignancies were non-Hodgkin lymphoma (n = 18), Hodgkin lymphoma (n = 2), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (n = 2), and 1 case each of multiple myeloma, Waldenström macroglobulinemia, Castleman disease, chronic myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. Of the 18 patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma, there was a predilection for specific histologic types (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in 8 cases and small lymphocytic lymphoma in 4) and a higher frequency of a primary extranodal origin in 6 (33%) cases. Conditions associated with hematologic malignancies were hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in 14 patients (52%) and systemic autoimmune diseases in 13 (48%), with both HCV and systemic autoimmune disease in 6 cases (22%). CONCLUSIONS: Hematologic neoplasia associated with cryoglobulinemia is defined by a clear predominance of lymphoproliferative disorders (mainly non-Hodgkin lymphoma), with substantial extranodal involvement and an elevated presence of immunologic markers. HCV infection is the main etiologic factor associated with hematologic malignancies in patients with cryoglobulinemia, followed by specific systemic autoimmune diseases such as Sjögren syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus, highlighting the close relationship between lymphoproliferation, autoimmunity, and viruses.