To determine the clonal nature of hematopoiesis and to assess lineage involvement in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), we used restriction fragment length polymorphisms of the X-linked genes phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK1) and hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) and the X-linked probe M27 beta. Eleven female MDS patients heterozygous for at least one of these probes were studied: 3 with refractory anemia (RA), 2 with RA with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), 2 with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), and 4 with RA with excess of blasts in transformation (RAEB-t). All exhibited clonal hematopoiesis as determined by Southern analysis of DNA prepared from peripheral blood (PB) and/or bone marrow (BM) cells. In three of the six patients heterozygous for the PGK1 gene, purified cell suspensions of polymorphonuclear cells (PMN), monocytes, lymphocytes, and/or T cells prepared from PB were tested. In addition, five of these patients were analyzed by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based procedure as described recently. This method was slightly adapted to facilitate the analysis of cell lysates of fluorescence-activated cell sorted (FACS) monocytes, T and B lymphocytes, and natural killer (NK) cells. The outcome of Southern and PCR analysis was concordant, showing that PMN and monocytes were clonally derived, whereas circulating T and B lymphocytes and NK cells exhibited random X-chromosome inactivation compatible with a polyclonal pattern. To address the question of whether T cells are derived from unaffected progenitor cells or that their origin had antedated the onset of MDS, naive and memory T cells were analyzed separately. Both subsets showed a polyclonal pattern. However, in one patient analysis of constitutive DNA suggested a skewed methylation, and the presence of clonal lymphocytes against a background of polyclonal lymphoid cells cannot be ruled out in this patient. PCR analysis of PB and BM cells showed a nonrandom, unilateral pattern of X-inactivation, compatible with a mixture of clonally (myeloid) and polyclonally (lymphoid) derived cells. In conclusion, in some patients, MDS represents a disorder with clonal hematopoiesis restricted to cells of myeloid origin, whereas a random X-inactivation pattern is found in lymphoid cells.