Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is particularly common in geriatric practice. As few data are available in very elderly patients, we conducted a 54-month retrospective study in patients over 70 years with MDS diagnosed at Hôpital Charles Foix. Patients with cobalamine, folate or iron deficiency were excluded. Regarding biological and morphologic approaches, MDS patients were classified according to the FAB criteria. We then tempted to reclassify the patients according to the WHO criteria. The Bournemouth scoring system was used as a prognostic tool. During the study period, 100 patients were included, 29 males and 71 females, median age 86 +/- 7 years (70-103). At the time of bone marrow sampling, a peripheral blood cytopenia was documented in 64 patients, a bicytopenia in 27 patients and a pancytopenia in 9 patients. Isolated anaemia (Hb < 12 g/dL) was found in 60 patients and isolated thrombocytopenia (< 150 x 10(9)/L) in 4. Macrocytosis (MCV > 100 fL) was observed in 21 % of the cases. According to the FAB criteria, the 100 patients were classified as follows: refractory anaemia (RA): 79%; RA with ringed sideroblasts (RARS): 8%; RA with excess of blasts (RAEB): 8%; RAEB in transformation: 1%; chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia: 4%. According to the WHO classification, the patients were reclassified as follows: RA (unilineage) (with or without ringed sideroblasts): 10%; refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia with or without ringed sideroblasts (RCMD): 73%; RAEB: 7% (RAEB-1 6%, RAEB-21%); MDS/Myeloproliferative disorder: 4%; unclassified (hypocellularity): 5%; acute leukaemia: 1%. In order to estimate prognosis at the time of the bone marrow aspirate, we calculated the Bournemouth'score: 8 patients scored 0,57 scored 1,25 scored 2,8 scored 3 and 2 scored 4. In this geriatric population, 83% cases of MDS are RA or RCMD (with or without sideroblasts); MDS with excess of blasts are uncommon. Thus, elderly patients under study with MDS were diagnosed at an earlier stage of the disease than younger ones from series published in the literature. Due to frequent comorbidities, geriatric patients may be symptomatic for a slight decrease of haemoglobin level. Therefore, elderly patients are investigated as soon as they present with moderate anaemia that may explain the early MDS diagnosis.