Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) predominantly affects older adults, a population with a poor prognosis, due to age, comorbidities and forms of disease. We present a retrospective study of 45 patients older than 60 years of age, with AML, who were diagnosed and/or treated in our clinic in the year 2001. Our study refers to 32 men, 63-80 years of age and 13 women, 62-85 years of age. Fourteen of them were diagnosed as de novo leukemia while 31 developed secondary leukemia, due to myelodysplasia, chronic myeloid leukemia and essential thrombocytemia. A therapeutic protocol that included 2 courses of induction chemotherapy with idarubicin 8mg/m2 for 3 days, aracytin 100 mg/m2 for 5 days and etoposide 75 mg/m2 for 5 days, followed by 2 courses of consolidation chemotherapy with aracytin 800 mg/m2/d for 4 days, was administered. In patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia we additionally administered all trans retinoic acid. Those with erythroleukemia also received erythropoietin, 10,000 IU 3 times a week. All patients received supportive therapy with blood products and G-CSF during blood marrow aplasia. Four patients refused therapy and three patients received only blood product support because of poor performance status. Nine out of the 38 patients who received chemotherapy (23.7%) achieved a complete remission after treatment, while, 13 out of 38 (34.2%) only a partial one (overall remission rate: 57.9 %). Ten patients relapsed in <6 months and 12 patients relapsed in >6 months. Patients who received only supportive treatment died 2-5 months after initial diagnosis. During therapy, 16 patients (42.1%) died due to: infection, cerebrovascular or gastrointestinal bleeding and acute myocardial infarction. In conclusion, it appears that a high percentage of the elderly patients with AML, despite the unfavourable prognosis, responded to chemotherapy (57.9%) and achieved longer survival durations compared to patients who refused therapy or received supportive treatment alone. Unfortunately, a large number of them exhibited serious complications during treatment, with a mortal outcome. Close follow-up and supportive care highly contributed to an improvement of treatment outcome in elderly patients with acute myeloid leukemia.