A 74-year-old woman with chronic auricular fibrillation, arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, ischemic cardiopathy, and peripheral arteriopathy presented with purpuric lesions on the lower limbs (Fig. 1) and, to a lesser extent, on the anterior area of the chest. The mucous membranes were not affected. In 1989, she was diagnosed with anemia that evolved until 1998, when a bone marrow biopsy revealed a myelodysplastic syndrome unclassified in French-American-British Group (FAB). The patient has required periodic transfusions since February 1999. A skin biopsy of the purpuric lesions revealed a leukocytoclastic vasculitis; the lesions cleared with topical corticosteroid treatment. In May 1999, the patient presented with inflammatory and painful lesions localized on the vulva (Fig. 2), which had evolved over several days, without fever. No lesions were observed in other locations. A cutaneous biopsy showed an intense dermal edema and a diffuse and polymorphous dermal infiltrate involving the follicular structures. Exocytosis, spongiosis, and mucin deposits, demonstrated by Alcian blue stain, were observed in the follicular epithelium. Mature neutrophils were predominant in the dermal infiltrate, but a small number of eosinophils and immature cells were also present (Fig. 3). The myelogenous origin of the immature lining cells was further confirmed by positive staining of intracytoplasmic granules with naphthol-ASD chloroacetate sterase (Leder's stain). Vasculitis was not observed. Routine laboratory tests revealed 3030 leukocytes/mm(3) (60% neutrophils), a hemoglobin level of 8.4 g/dL, and 92,000 platelets/mm(3). Treatment with 30 mg/day of prednisone was started, and the lesions cleared slowly within 4 weeks. A new bone marrow biopsy in September 1999 showed a similar appearance to that taken in 1998. The patient died in January 2000 as a result of pneumonia with cardiac and respiratory failure. A 66-year-old man presented with a febrile syndrome that had evolved over 5 days, and painful and pruritic cutaneous lesions on the face and posterior neck (Fig. 4). Three months before, the patient was diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia in acceleration phase. Examination revealed an edematous and erythematous face with pustular lesions on the surface, also involving the neck and the upper part of the back. The histopathologic examination revealed an intense edema and abscesses in the dermis. The infiltrate of these lesions was composed of mature neutrophils with the presence of abundant immature cells with a myelogenous aspect (Fig. 5). Analytical studies revealed 26,130 leukocytes/mm(3) (42% blasts). No specific treatment for Sweet's syndrome was administered and the lesions showed an improvement within 5 days. Eight days after admission, the patient died as a result of acute hemorrhage, before treatment for leukemia was initiated.