To determine the efficacy and tolerance to cyclosporine A (CsA) based therapy in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 16 patients with MDS consisting of 10 refractory anemia (RA) and 6 refractory anemia with accessory blasts less than 10% (RAEB-1) were analyzed. Five patients had hypocellular bone marrows and 11 patients had normocellular or hypercellular marrows. The dose of CsA was 2.5-5.5 mg/(kg.d) for 2 weeks to 2 years (mean 8 months). Two out of 16 patients were treated with CsA alone, 14 patients were treated with CsA, recombinant human erythropoietin, androgens, 1, 25 dihydroxy vitamin D(3) or two or three of them combination with CsA. Treatment responses were classified according to the International Working Group (IWG) criteria as complete remission (CR), partial remission (PR), hematological improvement (HI) and no response (NR). Patients who obtained CR, PR or HI were defined as responders. The results showed that HI was observed in 12 patients, PR in 2 patients and NR in 2 patients. Total response rate was 87.5%. Response rates shown in neutrophil lineage, platelet and erythroid lineage were 83.3%, 66.7% and 60%, respectively; their shortest time required to obtain some hematologic improvement after initiation of CsA therapy was 2 weeks, 1 month and 1 month, respectively. Of 13 patients being transfusion-dependent before treatment, 3 patients did not need transfusion any more and 5 showed the reduced transfusion requirements after CsA therapy. In 10 patients with RA, 9 responded to CsA. Of 6 patients with RAEB, 1 patient had no response and died of RAEB-t and 5 patients had transient responses. One of the latter transformed to CMML and two relapsed. The total response rate decreased to 50% in the patients with CsA therapy lasting more than 3 months at the end of following-up. The adverse effects included hirsutism, hyperplastic gingiva, reversible hepatic and renal dysfunction. In conclusion, the usefulness of CsA based therapy for MDS-RA and RAEB-1 with any marrow cellularity is useful, the CsA dose of 3-5 mg/(kg.d) is safe and efficacious.