Taking into consideration the existing disagreement in the literature, the aim of this paper was to estimate the value of the initial kinetics of autologous platelets labelled with 111In-oxinate, performed during the first 20 minutes after their intravenous injection. Two hypothesis were tested: 1. Initial 111In-platelet kinetics indicates the platelet sequestration site (in patients with normal mean platelet life span)/destruction site (in patients with shortened mean platelet life span), 2. Initial 111In-platelet kinetics indicates the quality of platelet separation and labelling procedure. We performed initial labelled platelet kinetics in thrombocytopenic patients (in order to test the first hypothesis) as well as in control (healthy) subjects (in order to test the second hypothesis). Thirty-nine persons were investigated: 33 with thrombocytopenia: 25 with shortened mean platelet life span, caused by chronic im mune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), eight with normal platelet life span and thrombocytopenia caused by myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), six healthy, control subjects (C). In all 39 persons platelet blood count on the day of platelet labelling was determined, autologous platelet labelling with 111In-oxinate was performed, general and differential yields of platelet labelling (GYL and DYL), as well as mean labelled platelets life span were determined. Besides that, initial labelled platelets kinetics was performed with initial 111In-platelets accumulation in the liver (IPAL) calculation, as well as the late platelet kinetics for platelet sequestration index and platelet sequestration/destruction site determination. We obtained two types of initial labelled platelets kinetics (not only in the patients with shortened platelet life span, but also in the subjects with normal labelled platelets life span), which differed in the IPAL value and in the ratio of the liver and the heart radioactivity: IPAL < 20% and IPAL>20%. We found statistically significant difference in GYL and DYL between the two groups: IPAL<20% and IPAL > 20%. Both yields were higher in IPAL<20% group. There was no significant difference between the two IPAL groups in the platelet blood count, labelled platelet life span, sequestration index and sequestration site. No correlation could be found between IPAL on one side and platelet blood count, sequestration index, and sequestration site on another. We concluded that initial labelled platelet kinetics could not indicate the platelet sequestration/destructon site (which is accomplished by the late labelled platelets kinetics), but nevertheless, it is very sensitive and useful method of platelet separation and labelling quality control. While in vitro quality control parameters (GYL and DYL) indicate the quality of only one part of this procedure, initial labelled platelet kinetics reflects discrete platelet function disturbance that might happen from the moment of blood sample collection till the labelled platelets intravenous injection.