Histomorphological evaluation of bone marrow trephines and smears represents the major approach to diagnose the chronic myeloproliferative diseases (CMPD) and the myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). However, rising insights into molecular pathogenesis of human diseases strengthen the attempt of pathologists to define and to detect underlying defects beyond the microscope. Since discovery of the Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myeloid leukemia as the first specific molecular abnormality ever detected in a human neoplasia the gain of knowledge of molecular pathomechanisms in Philadelphia chromosome negative (Ph-) CMPD was rather sparse. A decisive breakthrough in Ph CMPD was the finding of JAK2 (V617F) derived from a somatic point mutation in the majority of patients with polycythemia vera (P.vera) and half of patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF). It therefore can not be overestimated that detection of JAK2 (V617F) in a suspective myeloproliferation now enables a clearcut discrimination of a true Ph CMPD from a reactive state, e.g. P.vera from reactive erythrocytosis. Interestingly, a basic principle of molecular defects demonstrable in CMPD and related disorders seems to be the involvement of genes with kinase activities. Some of those genes will be discussed in more detail. In primary MDS, karyotyping via classical cytogenetics is the predominant molecular approach to estimate prognosis, e.g. -Y, del(5q) and del(20q) represent favourable anomalies. Indeed, in 5q- syndromes karyotyping enables definite subtyping and allows clinicians and patients to expect a good prognosis. Until now, dozens of molecular abnormalities such as mutations in AML1, FLT3 and Ras as well as epigenetic alterations of genes have been identified to various degrees in MDS subtypes. Some of them seem to be involved in disease initiation ("master event") and others might indicate disease progression. However, even though useful for further dissection of molecular pathomechanisms the majority of aberrations currently does not serve as potent markers in the daily routine. Nevertheless, in CMPD and MDS the importance of molecular analyses for diagnosis, estimation of prognosis, and disease monitoring will further increase in a foreseeable period of time.