The inaugural meeting of the International Working Group on MDS cytogenetics convened 22-23 October 2007 in Chicago, IL. Under the sponsorship of the Myelodysplastic Syndromes Foundation, the group was organized to address the substantial need for worldwide standardized cytogenetic testing for MDS in clinical practice and research. Eighteen cytogeneticists from 10 countries attended the first working group meeting. Representatives from France and Austria were unable to attend the Chicago meeting. Marilyn L. Slovak, PhD (City of Hope, USA) served as Working Group Chair and Gordon Dewald, PhD (Mayo Clinic, USA), served as Working Group Advisor and Co-Chair. Other members in attendance included: Mette Andersen, Rigshospitalet, Denmark; Lynda Campbell, St. Vincent's Hospital Melbourne, Australia; Athena Cherry, Stanford University, USA; Kathy Chun, North York General Hospital, Canada; Mike Griffiths, West Midlands Regional Genetics Lab, UK; Detlef Haase, Georg-August-Universität, Germany; Claudia Haferlach, MLL Münchner Leukämielabor GmbH, Germany; Anne Hagemeijer, University of Leuven, Belgium; Barbara Hildebrandt, Institut für Humangenetik & Anthropologie Dupsilonsseldorf, Germany; Douglas Horsman, BC Cancer Agency, Canada; M. Anwar Iqbal, University of Rochester, USA; Suresh Jhanwar, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, USA; Bertil Johansson, University Hospital, Sweden; Michelle LeBeau, University of Chicago, USA; Kazuma Ohyashiki, Tokyo Medical University, Japan; Francesc Solé, Hospital del Mar, Spain. The focus of the working group was to establish the natural history and clinical significance of cytogenetic anomalies associated with the myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), and to incorporate cytogenetic testing into the development of new treatments to cure MDS. Three specific goals were discussed in an effort to rapidly improve the care of patients with MDS. The first goal was how to educate physicians on the appropriate use of cost effective cytogenetic testing for their patients with MDS. The second goal discussed was how best this working group could assist pharmaceutical companies with the use of appropriate cytogenetic testing in their evaluation of new drugs. The final goal discussed was how to advance cytogenetic research into the origin, progression and clinical significance of genetic anomalies associated with MDS.