This study was purposed to explore the diagnostic role of flow cytometry in immunorelated pancytopenia (IRP). After 50 IRP patients were hospitalized, the concentration of serum ferritin, folic acid and vitamin B(12), immunologic test, platelet antibody, test of hepatitis A, B and C, haemolysis test and bone marrow smear examination were carried out, meanwhile the chromosome karyotype analysis and some routine examinations were performed. The 50 patients were divided into group A and group B. Group A consisted of 22 patients who were undefinedly diagnosed and intended to diagnosed as IRP, group B consisted of 28 definedly diagnosed patients with hematologic malignancies, including 7 cases of aplastic anemia, 2 of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 10 of myelodysplastic syndrome, 9 of megaloblastic anemia. In addition, 30 normal people were used as normal control group (group C). For groups A and B, the binding autoantibodies of bone marrow stem/progenitor cells, erythroblasts and myelocytes were detected by flow cytometry, meantime the ratio of total B-(CD10(+)) and CD5(+) B-lymphocytes in peripheral blood was assayed. For control group, the ratios of CD19(+) and CD5(+) B lymphocytes in peripheral blood were determined alone. The results indicated that the detection of bone marrow autoantibodies in 20 patients of group A showed positive with 90.90%. The IgG type was found mostly in antibody binding types, next the IgM type, the IgA type was fewer. The detection of bone marrow autoantibodies of 2 patients in group B showed positive with 7.14%. The positive rate in group A was obviously higher than that in group B (p < 0.01). The ratios of CD19(+) and CD5(+) B lymphocyte in peripheral blood were significant higher in group A than that in group B and control group (p < 0.01), but there was no significant difference between groups B and control. It is concluded that the application of flow cytometry in detecting the autoantibodies of bone marrow cells and CD19(+) B-and CD5(+) B-lymphocyte in peripheral blood can provide reliable diagnostic evidence and detection measure for diagnosis and differential diagnosis of IRP, as well as may contribute to draw up more effective therapeutic strategy.