 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) in its classic form is characterized by a profound isolated normochromic and usually macrocytic anemia with normal leukocytes and platelets, congenital malformations in approximately 50% of affected individuals, and growth retardation in 30% of affected individuals. The hematologic complications occur in 90% of affected individuals during the first year of life (median age of onset is two months). Eventually, 40% of affected individuals are corticosteroid dependent, 40% are transfusion dependent, and 20% go into remission. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from a mild form (e.g., mild anemia; no anemia with only subtle erythroid abnormalities; physical malformations without anemia) to a severe form of fetal anemia resulting in non-immune hydrops fetalis. DBA is associated with an increased risk of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and solid tumors including osteogenic sarcoma. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is based on the presence of: normochromic, usually macrocytic, anemia; reticulocytopenia; normal or slightly decreased leukocyte counts; normal or increased platelet counts; and normocellular bone marrow with selective deficiency of red cell precursors. Other genetic forms of anemia, such as Fanconi anemia, need to be considered and ruled out as appropriate. DBA has been associated with mutations in nine genes that encode ribosomal proteins. A mutation in one of these nine genes is identified in approximately 53% of individuals with DBA. Such testing is available clinically. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Corticosteroid treatment, recommended in children over age twelve months, can initially improve the red blood count in approximately 80% of affected individuals. Chronic transfusion with packed red blood cells is initially necessary while the diagnosis is made and in those not responsive to corticosteroids. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), the only curative therapy for the hematologic manifestations of DBA, is often recommended for those who are transfusion-dependent or develop other cytopenias. Treatment of malignancies should be coordinated by an oncologist. Chemotherapy must be given cautiously as it may lead to prolonged cytopenia and subsequent toxicities.  Prevention of secondary complications: Transfusion-related iron overload is the most common complication in transfusion-dependent individuals. Iron chelation therapy with deferasirox orally or desferrioxamine subcutaneously is recommended after 10-20 transfusions. Steroid-related side effects must also be closely monitored, especially as related to risk of infection, growth retardation, and bone density in growing children. Often patients will be placed on transfusion therapy if these side effects are intolerable.  Surveillance: complete blood counts several times a year; bone marrow aspirate/biopsy to evaluate morphology and cellularity in the event of another cytopenia or a change in response to treatment. In steroid-dependent individuals: monitor blood pressure and growth (in children).  Agents/circumstances to avoid: infection (especially those on corticosteroids); deferiprone for the treatment of iron overload has lead to severe neutropenia in a few individuals with DBA.  Testing of relatives at risk: Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives of a proband with a known pathogenic mutation allows for early diagnosis and appropriate monitoring for bone marrow failure, physical abnormalities, and related cancers.  GENETIC COUNSELING: DBA is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Approximately 40% to 45% of affected individuals have inherited the mutation from a parent; approximately 55% to 60% have a de novo mutation. Each child of an individual with DBA has a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation. Prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the disease-causing mutation has been identified in the family; if no laboratory offering prenatal testing is listed in the GeneTests Laboratory Directory, such testing may be available through laboratories offering custom mutation prenatal testing.