 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Familial monosomy 7 is typically characterized by early-childhood onset of evidence of bone marrow insufficiency/failure associated with increased risk for myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). Bone marrow failure/MDS/AML follows within a few months to years of identification of a monosomy 7 cell line in peripheral blood. Nearly all individuals reported with familial mosaic monosomy 7 have died of their disease. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The finding of a monosomy 7 cell line detected during evaluation of a hematologic abnormality or malignancy or during the use of chromosomal studies in the diagnosis of other conditions needs to be confirmed with bone marrow cytogenetic and interphase FISH studies. A bone marrow karyotype of 45,XX,-7 in females or 45,XY,-7 in males, often mosaic with a normal cell line (i.e., 46,XX in females and 46, XY in males), confirms the presence of a monosomy 7 cell line. Of note, individuals with a family history of monosomy 7 (i.e., a sib) may initially have a normal karyotype in peripheral blood and/or bone marrow and over time transition to mosaic monosomy 7 in peripheral blood and/or bone marrow. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Definitive therapy is bone marrow transplantation (BMT) prior to the emergence of a leukemic clone. It is recommended that sibs who are potential bone marrow donors be evaluated with appropriate cytogenetic studies to evaluate their suitability. Prevention of secondary complications: It is unknown if the standard protocols for ablative therapy prior to BMT should be modified. Surveillance: Annual monitoring of peripheral blood karyotype, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels helps identify bone marrow abnormalities (cytopenias and bone marrow dysplasia) prior to the development of AML or MDS. Testing of relatives at risk: In both children and adults with a family history of mosaic monosomy 7, signs and symptoms that cannot be accounted for otherwise should be evaluated by a physician as possible early indications of the disorder. GENETIC COUNSELING: The mode of inheritance of familial monosomy 7 is unknown.