 BACKGROUND: Childhood cancer survivors were at risk of development of second malignant neoplasms. The aim of this study is to evaluate the incidence, risk factors and outcome of second malignant neoplasms in childhood cancer survivors in a tertiary paediatric oncology centre in Hong Kong, China. METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of patients with childhood cancer treated in Children's Cancer Centre in Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong, China between May 1984 and June 2009. Case records of patients who developed second malignant neoplasms were reviewed. RESULTS: Totally 1374 new cases aged less than 21-year old were treated in our centre in this 25-year study period. Twelve cases developed second malignant neoplasms with 10-year and 20-year cumulative incidence of 1.3% (95% confidence interval 0.3% - 2.3%) and 2.9% (95% confidence interval 1.1% - 4.7%) respectively. Another 4 cases were referred to us from other centres for the management of second malignant neoplasms. In this cohort of 16 children with second malignant neoplasms, the most frequent second malignant neoplasms were acute leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome (n = 6) and central nervous system tumor (n = 4). Median interval between diagnosis of primary and second malignant neoplasms was 7.4 years (range 2.1 - 13.3 years). Eight patients developed second solid tumor within the previous irradiated field. Radiotherapy significantly increased the risk of development of second solid tumor in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (P = 0.027). Seven out of 16 patients who developed second malignant neoplasms had a family history of cancer among the first or second-degree relatives. Nine patients died of progression of second malignant neoplasms, mainly resulted from second central nervous system tumor and osteosarcoma. CONCLUSIONS: Cumulative incidence of second cancer in our centre was comparable to western countries. Radiotherapy was associated with second solid tumour among patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Patients who developed second brain tumor and osteosarcoma had a poor outcome.