 BACKGROUND: Myelodysplastic syndrome is a rare, chronic hematological disease characterized by heterogeneous clinical presentations. Subtypes of myelodysplastic syndrome are characterized by different survival times and ability to transform into acute myeloid leukemia. OBJECTIVES: The objective of the study included the assessment of the relationship between the images obtained by magnetic resonance scans of lumbar spine and the clinical symptoms of the disease in patients diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome, as well as the assessment of the correlation of the images with the phase of transformation into acute myeloid leukemia. MATERIALMETHODS: The study-related tests were carried out in Specialist Hospital No. 1 in Bytom between 2006 and 2011 and involved 53 patients aged 55รท77, divided into groups according to the diagnosed subtype of myelodysplastic syndrome. The study also included the prognosis of overall survival and time to transformation into AML on the basis of valid classifications. The spinal magnetic resonance scans were obtained from medical documentation. The analysis included images obtained using T1- and T2-weighted sequences in sagittal, transverse and frontal planes in all patients, images obtained using the STIR sequence from 21 patients as well as 40 images obtained after contrast administration. The statistical analysis of the results was carried out using STATISTICA software. CONCLUSIONS: The obtained results demonstrated that the magnetic resonance scans revealed statistically significant changes in the images of bone marrow in vertebral body scans; with a decrease in the intensity of MRI signals correlated with the RAEB subtype, particularly with transformation into acute myeloid leukemia as well as with the high IPSS risk score with regard to the time of survival and transformation into acute myeloid leukemia. The research-related test results indicate the importance of magnetic resonance imaging in diagnostics and the assessment of the disease dynamics.