Background: Thrombocytopenia (platelet counts less than 150,000/μl) is commonly encountered in various hematological disorders including myelodysplastic syndromes as well as various non-myelodysplastic hematological conditions. Aim: The present study was undertaken to calculate the prevalence of various conditions associated with thrombocytopenia and to record the megakaryocytic alterations in various cases of thrombocytopenia. Apart from this by means of statistical analysis it was tried to analyze whether a significant difference existed in megakaryocytic alteration noted in myelodysplastic versus non- myelodysplastic conditions. Materials and Methods: A prospective series of 60 bone marrow aspirations along with concomitant bone marrow biopsies was conducted in a tertiary care centre catering to both urban as well as rural population in north India. Statistical Analysis: The distribution of morphological changes in cases of non myelodysplastic conditions and myelodysplastic were compared using Chi-Square test. A p-value less than 0.05 was considered significant. Results: The commonest cause of thrombocytopenia for which bone marrow examination was sought was dimorphic anaemia (18 cases, 30%), followed by myelodysplastic syndrome (06 cases, 10%) which was followed equally by acute lymphocytic leukemia and blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Of all the non-MDS conditions apart from dimorphic anaemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and chronic myeloid leukemia (blast crisis); megakaryocytic dysplastic forms were not noted in any other condition. In cases of myelodysplasia; dysplastic forms, bare megakaryocytic nuclei, hypogranular forms and micromegakaryocytes were seen. Comparison between frequencies of normal, high and low number of nuclear lobes among MDS (n=9) and non MDS (n=68) conditions were found to be statistically significant. Conclusion: Further studies on the evaluation of megakaryocytic alteration and their contribution to thrombocytopenia can provide growing knowledge to the pathogenesis of numerous hematopoietic disorders that may identify broader clinical applications of the newer strategies to regulate platelet count and functioning.