Immunoregulatory T and B cell functions in 15 patients with primary myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) were studied by measuring the proliferative and the stimulatory capacity of T and B cells, respectively, in autologous (auto) and allogeneic (allo) mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR). T cell proliferation in the auto MLR was 25% of the control (P less than .02), whereas proliferation in the allo MLR was normal. When control T cells were stimulated by MDS B cells, their proliferative response was only 57% of the control (P less than .01). The mechanism responsible for these abnormalities was studied by determining the capacity of MDS and normal T cells to produce interleukin 2 (IL 2) and to generate IL 2 receptors (IL 2R) following stimulation with control and MDS B cells. In the auto MLR of MDS patients, only 3% +/- 2% of T cells developed IL 2R positivity, whereas in control cultures 12% +/- 2% of T cells were positive, as determined by immunofluorescence, using a monoclonal antibody (MoAb) directed against the IL 2R, and FACS analysis. When MDS T cells were stimulated by control B cells, IL 2R generation and the production of IL 2 were within normal limits. In contrast, when control T cells were stimulated by MDS B cells or control B cells, the MDS B cells induced production of only 26% of IL 2 as compared with control B cells. In parallel experiments, IL 2R generation in control T cells stimulated by either MDS or control B cells was similar. We conclude that in the primary MDS, T and B cell interactions are impaired. Although MDS T cells develop normal quantities of IL 2R and produce normal amounts of IL 2 when stimulated by control B cells, they are markedly impaired when stimulated by self B cells. Similarly, MDS B cells can induce IL 2R generation in control T cells but not in MDS T cells. Myelodysplastic B cells are also defective in inducing IL 2 production by normal T cells in an allo MLR. These in vitro abnormalities strongly suggest that generation of lymphocytes with immunoregulatory functions is impaired in patients with MDS.