We examined the in vitro effect of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (rhG-CSF) on neutrophil anomalies in 20 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and eight patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Neutrophil alkaline phosphatase (NAP) activity was determined in nine MDS patients and eight CML patients by a scoring method. NAP scores were decreased in six of the nine patients with MDS and in all of the patients with CML. In all patients with these diseases, NAP scores increased by incubating the blood with rhG-CSF. An increase in NAP scores by rhG-CSF was observed even at a concentration of 1 U/mL in patients with MDS but was observed only at higher concentrations (1,000 to 10,000 U/mL) in patients with CML. Significant increases in NAP scores occurred at 12 hours' incubation in patients with MDS, whereas the increase was more gradual in patients with CML. This time course difference was thought to be due mainly to the difference in cell populations of circulating myeloid cells between MDS patients and CML patients. Induction of NAP activity by rhG-CSF in patients with both these diseases was suppressed by the addition of inhibitors of RNA or protein synthesis. Neutrophil superoxide anion (O2-) production induced by N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP) was determined in the other 11 patients with MDS. This neutrophil function was decreased in seven of the 11 patients with MDS, normal in two patients, and increased in two patients. Preincubation with rhG-CSF caused a significant increase in fMLP-induced O2- production in nine of the 11 patients with MDS. rhG-CSF enhanced this neutrophil function in a time- and dose-dependent manner, and maximal stimulation was observed at 2,000 to 4,000 U/mL of rhG-CSF and at five to ten minutes' incubation. The present results show that rhG-CSF is able to repair at least in part the neutrophil anomalies in these patients, and our data, especially for patients with MDS, suggest the clinical usefulness of rhG-CSF for this preleukemic disorder.