During the early period following bone marrow transplantation before the immune system has reached full functional maturity, unprimed, nonspecific lytic systems may play a critical role as antiviral or antitumor effectors. The reconstitution of cells with this potential is of particular importance in recipients of bone marrow that has been depleted of mature T lymphocytes to prevent graft v host disease (GVHD). We examined the recovery of natural killer (NK) cells and interleukin 2 (IL 2)-augmented lymphokine-activated killer cells (LAK) in 48 patients at various intervals following transplantation of bone marrow depleted of mature cellular elements by treatment with soybean agglutinin and sheep RBCs (SBA-E- BMT). We found normal levels of both NK and LAK activity as early as 3 weeks following SBA-E- BMT. When compared with cells from controls, NK and LAK precursors from transplant recipients appeared to be activated in vivo in that freshly isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients had an elevated cytolytic activity toward NK-insensitive targets and a more rapid response to activation by IL 2. In patients as well as controls, both LAK precursors and LAK effectors lacked antigens present on mature T lymphocytes (CD3, CD4, or CD8) but expressed antigens present on NK cells (CD2, CD16, and NKH1A). The LAK cells did not lyse either donor or host peripheral blood T cell targets. The activity of NK effectors but not LAK precursors survived the in vivo total body irradiation used for pretransplant conditioning in three patients studied. LAK precursors could be demonstrated as early as 18 days following transplant at a time when the bone marrow contained primarily donor-derived cells. Little or no LAK activity could be generated from cells of the SBA-E- BM graft itself, suggesting that LAK precursors differentiate rapidly from more primitive progenitors in the marrow graft. Thus, our data indicate that the NK and LAK lytic systems are among the earliest activities to recover during immune reconstitution following T cell-depleted BMTs.