Peripheral blood samples from 48 untreated and 20 treated patients with disease entities that directly or indirectly affect hematopoiesis [dys-myelopoietic syndrome (DMS), refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB) or in transformation (RAEBIT), lymphoma, myeloma, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and solid tumors with uninvolved bone marrow] were measured with the Technicon H-6000 automated hematology analyzer; this instrument provides a differential count on 10(4) white blood cells (WBC) effected by means of flow cytochemistry (peroxidase content) and volume (light scatter) discrimination. Cases with DMS and RAEB showed statistically significantly lower WBC counts than normal, whereas cases with lymphoma showed significantly higher values. No disease entity demonstrated changes in mean peroxidase activity (MPA) that were significantly different from normal, although all disease entities, including cases with solid tumors, showed significantly higher (two to severalfold) proportions of cells with high peroxidase (HPX) content, probably as a reflection of a disturbance of normal hemopoiesis with the emergence of younger granulocytic forms. All cases with paraleukemia (DMS, RAEB, and RAEBIT) showed significantly higher values of large unstained cells (LUC), whereas cases with lymphoma showed significantly lower LUC values. There were no statistically significant differences for any parameter (WBC counts, MPA, HPX, or LUC) among the paraleukemia subtypes. However, based on the displayed trends, a case presenting with dyserythropoiesis, relatively low WBC counts, abnormal HPX values, and LUC below 10% should be suspected for RAEB, whereas the presence of greater than 10% LUC and almost normal or even slightly elevated WBC counts should suggest a more accelerated phase of RAEB. Unless complicated by a leukemic phase, cases of lymphoma or myeloma did not display changes in any of the parameters analyzed by the H-6000. Similarly, patients with AIDS had no overt changes other than a trend to lower WBC counts with occasionally higher or lower absolute lymphocyte counts than normal. The peripheral blood of patients with solid tumors displayed a slight increase in HPX, suggesting an indirect effect on hemopoiesis since careful workup failed to demonstrate bone marrow involvement. Our data demonstrates that an H-6000 analysis has a role in the evaluation and follow-up of all these entities particularly to document leukemic transformation of either lymphoma, myeloma, or RAEB.