The use of chromosome banding techniques has provided a valuable diagnostic tool in various malignancies. The application of these methods, however, is often restricted by a low yield of mitotic cells and the patient's unwillingness to comply with repeated bone marrow aspiration. In an attempt to promote mitotic activity of leukemic cells from the bone marrow and peripheral blood, we employed a new method based on culturing the cells in the presence of a conditioned medium derived from a human bladder carcinoma cell line (5637). In addition to colony stimulating factor, this conditioned medium contains a factor that is capable of stimulating leukemic myeloblast proliferation. Bone marrow and peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 58 patients with a variety of myeloid leukemias were cultured for 24 to 120 hours in the presence or absence of conditioned medium. These bone marrow cells showed a pronounced increase in the mitotic index (5- to 50-fold) as compared to unstimulated cultures, and a greater than 100-fold increase as compared to fresh, uncultured bone marrow cells. Analyzable metaphases could be obtained even in marrow samples in which direct or 24-hour G-banding techniques had failed to reveal metaphases. The effect observed on peripheral blood cells was even more dramatic because prior to culture no mitotic cells were detected, whereas up to 2% mitotic cells were found in conditioned medium-stimulated peripheral leukemic cells. Karyotype analysis of 36 out of the 58 leukemic patients has shown that the chromosome changes discovered in conditioned medium stimulated cells were identical to those found in unstimulated cells. New chromosome aberrations, attributable to the stimulation of growth by conditioned medium, were not found. The quality of the metaphases analyzed following conditioned medium stimulation was considerably better than that of unstimulated samples. Frozen cells, when cultured with conditioned medium, were also suitable for cytogenetic analysis. Thus, the use of this conditioned medium permits adequate cytogenetic analysis even in cases where such analysis was previously impossible.