Since all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) not only enhance proliferation and differentiation of normal myeloid cells but also synergistically promote the differentiation of myeloid leukemic blast cells in vitro, we have started a pilot study of combined treatment with ATRA and G-CSF in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome, to analyze the effect of these drugs on hematopoietic differentiation. ATRA was given at 45 mg/m2/day p.o. from week 1-12 and G-CSF at 5 micrograms/kg/day s.c. from week 5-12 with dose modifications according to the absolute neutrophil counts (ANC). A total of 15 patients, predominantly with refractory anemia, were treated. During initial ATRA therapy, a bilineage response with increases of both ANC and platelet counts occurred in three patients. During combined ATRA/G-CSF therapy, ANC increased in all patients, and platelets increased in three out of 14 evaluable patients. An increase in hemoglobin concentration and a decrease in transfusion requirements occurred in one patient each. In the bone marrow, the myeloid-to-erythroid ratio increased during ATRA treatment and remained increased during concomitant G-CSF administration, while the maturation index of myeloid cells increased only in response to ATRA therapy, but returned to baseline during ATRA/G-CSF treatment. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated persistence of the abnormal clones in all patients. The number of circulating progenitor cells CFU-GM increased in all patients studied. Serum concentrations of the soluble TNF receptor and IL-2 receptor both increased, while TNF-alpha--already elevated prior to therapy--and soluble ICAM-1 concentrations did not significantly change. Adverse effects included dermatitis and cheilosis in most patients, and a drop in platelet counts related to G-CSF in one patient. The pilot study demonstrates that the combination treatment with ATRA/G-CSF is well tolerated, leading to normalization of ANC in most, and improvement of platelets and red blood cells in a subgroup of patients.