Expression of P-glycoprotein (PGP), the product of the multi-drug resistance mdr1 gene was studied by immunocytochemistry on bone marrow slides using JSB1 monoclonal antibody and the alkaline phosphatase-antialkaline phosphatase (APAAP) and avidin-biotin-peroxidase (ABC) techniques in 82 cases of untreated myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), of whom ten had evolved to AML (MDS-AML). The relationship between PGP expression, myeloperoxidase activity and immunophenotype of blast cells, karyotype and outcome was also analyzed. PGP expression was found in the blasts of 34 of the 82 patients (41%), the majority of blasts being stained in positive cases. PGP positivity was rare in 'low risk' MDS (RA and RARS: 2/12 cases) as opposed to 'high risk' MDS (RAEB, RAEB-T, CMML: 25/60 cases) and MDS-AML (7/10 cases) (p = 0.04). PGP expression was positively correlated to the presence of myeloperoxidase activity in less than 3% of blasts (p = 0.025), and CD34 antigen expression (p = 0.04), whereas CD33 antigen expression had borderline significance (p = 0.07), demonstrating that PGP expression predominated in blasts with an immature phenotype. An abnormal karyotype, and especially the presence of monosomy 7, was not correlated to a higher incidence of PGP expression, however. There was a trend for more frequent progression to AML and for shorter survival in PGP-positive cases, but differences with PGP-negative cases were not significant. Twenty patients received intensive anthracycline-Ara-C chemotherapy and ten (50%) achieved complete response, including 9/13 (69%) PGP-negative cases and 1/7 (14%) PGP-positive cases (p = 0.03). Twenty other patients were treated with low-dose Ara-C and ten (50%) responded (complete or partial response). PGP-positivity did not negatively affect response to low-dose Ara-C: 4/11 responses in PGP-negative, and 6/9 responses in PGP-positive patients (p = 0.18). Because the treatment choice in advanced MDS (especially between anthracycline-Ara-C or low-dose Ara-C, chemotherapy) is difficult, our preliminary therapeutic results suggest that the analysis of PGP expression could have practical importance in MDS. These findings however, will have to be confirmed on larger numbers of patients. Clinical trials using drugs potentially reverting mdr, activity could also be warranted in MDS.