Clonal haemopoiesis has previously been demonstrated in some 30% of patients in remission of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Whilst a 'clonal remission' in many such patients may represent a skewed X-chromosome inactivation pattern in haemopoietic cells, its relationship to an underlying preleukaemic state remains uncertain. We therefore analysed the clonal status of 48 female patients in remission of AML using X-chromosome linked restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) within the X-linked PGK and HPRT genes and the DXS255 (M27 beta) locus, and carried out in conjunction a detailed study of the morphological and karyotypic features of the patients' bone marrows. During remission, 35 patients (73%) with AML demonstrated nonclonal haemopoiesis, and their bone marrows were morphologically normal. Remission haemopoietic tissue in nine cases (19%) showed a skewed X-chromosome inactivation pattern and remission bone marrows in these patients had features of trilineage myelodysplasia (TMDS), with seven having similar features at presentation. Analysis of constitutional DNA showed a non-clonal pattern in seven of these patients, but was unsuccessful in two cases. These nine patients with post-chemotherapy TMDS were considered to have true clonal haemopoiesis. Four patients (8%) with a skewed X-chromosome inactivation pattern had normal remission bone marrows. Analysis of constitutional DNA showed a skewed pattern in two of these patients, but was unsuccessful in two cases. Cytogenetic investigation during remission in the nine patients with TMDS showed a normal karyotype in four cases and the acquisition of new karyotypic abnormalities in three cases. In contrast, 10 female patients in remission of de novo acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) were shown to have non-clonal haemopoiesis. We conclude that the majority of patients with AML who achieve remission after cytoreductive chemotherapy have non-clonal haemopoiesis, and when clonal remissions are observed these are commonly associated with the development of trilineage myelodysplasia in the bone marrow, with or without karyotypic abnormalities. True clonal remission in association with morphologically normal haemopoiesis is a rare entity, the significance and frequency of which remain uncertain.