BACKGROUND: Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) are typically associated with small vessel vasculitides. They are also found in situations where other autoantibodies are common, sometimes after infections and possibly in individuals who have received multiple blood transfusions. AIMS: The aim of this study was to determine the incidence of ANCA in a variety of haematological disorders, where these predisposing factors may be at work. METHODS: Sera from patients with myelodysplasia (n = 26), acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) (n = 3), and myeloproliferative (n = 25) or lymphoproliferative syndromes (n = 16) were screened for ANCA using a crude neutrophil cytoplasmic extract ELISA and indirect immunofluorescent examination of normal peripheral blood neutrophils. Positive results were confirmed by ELISAs for anti-proteinase 3, anti-myeloperoxidase or anti-elastase antibodies. RESULTS: ANCA were demonstrated in two patients with myelodysplasia, both with chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia and greater than 5% blasts in the bone marrow. Both of these individuals were infected at the time that ANCA were demonstrated and other autoantibodies were present. One of these individuals had never had evidence of any vasculitis; the other probably developed myelodysplasia after treatment with cyclophosphamide for Wegener's granulomatosis. ANCA were demonstrated in one individual with AML secondary to myelodysplasia. ANCA were also found in a patient with lymphoma in whom autoantibodies against red cells and platelets were already noted. ANCA were demonstrated in one further individual with lymphomatoid granulomatosis, a condition that resembles Wegener's granulomatosis clinically and histologically, but which is treated as a lymphoma. No ANCA were present in any of the patients with myeloproliferative syndromes. DISCUSSION: ANCA probably occur secondary to immune dysregulation in myelodysplasia and the lymphoproliferative conditions and they are not necessarily associated with the presence of a vasculitis.