The wild type p53 protein has a short half-life and cannot be detected by immunohistochemistry on tissue sections. Mutated p53, on the other hand, has a prolonged half-life and becomes detectable by this method, so that its detection by immunohistochemistry in solid tumors is almost synonymous with mutation. We assessed the value of immunocytochemical analysis of p53 protein on blood or bone marrow slides in the detection of p53 mutation in hematological malignancies, by comparison with single-stranded conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of exons 4 to 10 of the P53 gene. One hundred and twenty eight patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL), myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), or chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) were studied by both methods. Immunocytochemistry showed detectable levels of intracellular p53 in 19 cases (including 2/19 AML, 2/21 ALL, 11/48 MDS, 4/40 CLL). Staining by p53 antibodies was restricted to the nucleus of blasts in AML, ALL, and MDS, and of lymphocytes in CLL. In 16 of the 19 cases, SSCP analysis, followed by direct sequencing, showed a p53 missense mutation in exons 4 to 8 of the gene. In the remaining three cases, where the number of cells stained by p53 antibodies was small, no p53 mutation could be detected. On the other hand, SSCP and sequence analysis identified a p53 mutation in two patients who had negative immunocytochemical findings. Both cases had a nonsense mutation, presumably leading to reduced levels of truncated p53. Thus, overall, immunocytochemistry and SSCP gave concordant results in 123 of the 128 (96%) patients analyzed. Our findings show that immunocytochemistry on blood and bone marrow smears is a sensitive method of p53 mutation detection in hematological malignancies, except in the rare patients with chain-terminating mutations. Positive immunocytochemistry is found in some patients with normal SSCP findings, and could correspond to overexpression of a non-mutated p53, but also to p53 mutation in a minor proportion of the malignant cells, undetectable by SSCP.