PURPOSE: Childrens Cancer Group (CCG) protocol 2861 was designed to test the feasibility of aggressively timed induction therapy followed by autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) as the sole postremission therapy for newly diagnosed children with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between April 1988 and October 1989, 142 patients were eligible for study. All patients entered received a timing-intensive five-drug induction of dexamethasone, cytarabine (Ara-C), thioguanine, etoposide, and daunorubicin (DCTER) over 4 days with a second cycle administered after 6 days of rest, irrespective of hematologic status at that time. Most patients subsequently received a second two-cycle induction course. Those who achieved remission were eligible for bone marrow ablative therapy with busulfan and cyclophosphamide, followed by 4-hydroperoxy-cyclophosphamide (4-HC)-purged autologous or allogeneic BMT rescue. RESULTS: One hundred eight (76%) patients achieved remission: 19 (13%) died of complications of the leukemia and/or chemotherapy, and 15 (11%) failed to achieve remission. Seventy-four patients subsequently underwent BMT with either autologous (n = 58) or allogeneic (n = 16) rescue. For patients who received autologous rescue with 4-HC-purged grafts, the actuarial disease-free survival (DFS) rate at 3 years from the day of transplant is 51%, compared with 55% for patients who received allogeneic grafts (P = .92). At 3 years, the overall actuarial survival rate for all 142 patients entered on this study is 45%, with an event-free survival (EFS) rate of 37%. Adverse prognostic factors for outcome included an elevated WBC count or the presence of CNS leukemia at the time of AML diagnosis. CONCLUSION: Results suggest that aggressively timed induction therapy followed by marrow ablation and BMT rescue with either autologous or allogeneic grafts for children with newly diagnosed AML or MDS is both feasible and effective.