The proto-oncogenes c-jun, junB, junD, and c-fos recently have been shown to encode for transcription factors with a leucine zipper that mediates dimerization to constitute active transcription factors; juns were shown to dimerize with each other and with c-fos, whereas fos was shown to dimerize only with juns. After birth, hematopoietic cells of the myeloid lineage, and some other terminally differentiated cell types, express high levels of c-fos. Still, the role of fos/jun transcription factors in normal myelopoiesis or in leukemogenesis has not been established. Recently, c-jun, junB, and junD were identified as myeloid differentiation primary response genes stably expressed following induction of terminal differentiation of myeloblastic leukemia M1 cells. Intriguingly, c-fos, though induced during normal myelopoiesis, was not induced upon M1 differentiation. To gain further insights into the role of fos/jun in normal myelopoiesis and leukemogenicity, M1fos and M1junB cell lines, which constitutively express c-fos and junB, respectively, were established. It was shown that enforced expression of c-fos, and to a lesser extent junB, in M1 cells results in both an increased propensity to differentiate and a reduction in the aggressiveness of the M1 leukemic phenotype. M1fos cells constitutively expressed immediate-early and late genetic markers of differentiated M1 cells. The in vitro differentiation of normal myeloblasts into mature macrophages and granulocytes, as well as the increased propensity of M1fos leukemic myeloblasts to be induced for terminal differentiation, was dramatically impaired with use of c-fos antisense oligomers in the culture media. Taken together, these observations show that the proto-oncogenes which encode for fos/jun transcription factors play important roles in promoting myeloid differentiation. The ability of the M1 leukemic myeloblasts to be induced for terminal differentiation in the absence of apparent fos expression indicates that there is some redundancy among the fos/jun family of transcription factors in promoting myeloid differentiation; however, juns alone cannot completely compensate for the lack of fos. Thus, genetic lesions affecting fos/jun expression may play a role in the development of "preleukemic" myelodysplastic syndromes and their further progression to leukemias.