It is well known that cytogenetic analysis in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) provides information useful in determining their prognosis. Based on the chromosomal results obtained from 401 MDS patients by a multicentric study in Japan, we studied correlations between chromosomal findings and prognosis or leukemic transformation in MDS patients. Patients with complex aberrations (cytogenetic abnormalities at more than three chromosomes), of any subtype, had a poor prognosis; for example, > 60% of patients with refractory anemia (RA) showing complex aberrations died within one year, but only 11% of them developed leukemia. In patients with RA with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), > 70% of those with complex aberrations evolved into the leukemic phase and survived for less than one year, suggesting a biologic heterogeneity in RARS patients. By contrast, about 5% of patients with RA or RARS exhibiting chromosomal findings other than -7/7q-, +8, two aberrations, and complex aberrations, developed leukemia and had a favorable prognosis. Therefore, the presence of chromosome abnormalities alone in patients with RA or RARS is not a factor in predicting leukemic transformation or poor prognosis. In patients with refractory anemia with an excess of blasts (RAEB), the presence of chromosome aberrations at MDS diagnosis affected the occurrence of leukemic transformation (24% versus 43%), however, no particular difference was noted in patients with RAEB in transformation with regard to whether they had chromosome changes or not, and about 60% of them evolved into leukemia. The poor prognosis related to complex aberrations was consistently noted in all MDS subtypes or age-matched groups, indicating that this cytogenetic anomaly is an independent risk factor for a poor prognosis in MDS patients. The duration between MDS diagnosis and development of the leukemic phase and that between the latter and death were significantly shorter in patients with complex aberrations than those without this change. Although the clinical significance of certain chromosomal abnormalities differs among subtypes of MDS, a new scoring system for predicting prognosis by cytogenetic changes, in combination with hematologic parameters, was proposed.