The proliferative activity of the haematopoietic and plasma cells in bone marrow was evaluated under normal and neoplastic conditions, by means of a sequential double immunostaining technique, using monoclonal antibody MIB-1 recognizing the cell proliferation-associated nuclear antigen Ki-67, and antibodies against glycophorin-C, myeloperoxidase, factor VIII-related antigen, and immunoglobulin light chains. Fifty-eight B5 fixed, paraffin-embedded bone marrow biopsies were analysed, including 11 normal controls. 10 cases of myelodysplasia, 14 cases of chronic myeloproliferative disorder, eight cases of acute non-lymphoid leukaemia, and 15 cases of myeloma. In normal marrows, the highest proliferative activity was noticed in the erythroid cells (75% to 95%; mean 90%), in comparison with myeloid precursors (15% to 80%; mean 38%), and megakaryocytes (10% to 20%; mean 14%): no Ki-67 positive plasma cells were found. In all investigated haematological disorders, the expression of MIB-1 by erythroid cells was similar to that observed in controls. Similarly, the percentage of MIB-1 + myeloid precursors in chronic myeloproliferative disorders and myelodysplasia largely overlapped the values observed in normals, and comparable values were also found in the blast cells from acute non-lymphoid leukaemia type M1 and M2. These findings suggest that the evaluation of either erythroid or myeloid proliferative activity is of little value in the differential diagnosis between these myeloproliferative disorders. By contrast, the obvious increase of Ki-67 expression of megakaryocytes in chronic myeloproliferative disorders, with labelling also of micro-megakaryocytes, might sustain the diagnosis in controversial cases. Since cases of mature myeloma showed less than 2% of Ki-67 positive cells, evaluation of proliferative activity is of no value in the differential diagnosis with reactive plasmacytosis. The sequential double immunophenotyping for Ki-67 antigen and for haematopoietic cell lineage-associated markers can be applied in a consistent manner to routine bone marrow biopsies to evaluate proliferating cells in normal and neoplastic conditions.