A 52-year-old female was admitted to our hospital in August 1988, for evaluation of purpura and gingival bleeding. Hematologic examination showed mild leukocytosis (12,400/microliter) and severe thrombocytopenia (1,000/microliter). On bone marrow examination, megakaryocyte count was normal and the number of myeloblasts was increased (7.2%). Serological examination was positive for anti-nuclear antibody and anti-DNA antibody. She was diagnosed as having idiopathic or autoimmune thrombocytopenia, and received thrombocyte transfusion and gamma-globulin administration. Hematologic values improved temporarily, but leukocytosis and thrombocytopenia recurred. On the 22nd hospital day, leukocytes increased to 49,300/microliter and thrombocytes decreased to 10,000/microliter. Bone marrow myeloblasts were also increased to 18.8%, and she was suspected of having myelodysplastic syndrome. Then, hematologic values improved simultaneously, and she was discharged in November 1988. After the discharge, leukocyte count ranged from 6,000 to 16,500/microliter, but the number of bone marrow myeloblasts was normal. However, transient thrombocytopenia appeared in association with decrease or absence of bone marrow megakaryocytes and rise of platelet associated-IgG, (PA-IgG) to 99.6 ng/10(7) cells. From September to December 1989, she complained of fever, morning stiffness, multiple arthralgia, and oral ulcer. On serological findings, she was positive for LE cell. Therefore, she was diagnosed as having systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In January 1990, she had a high grade fever and dyspnea. Bilateral pleuritis and interstitial pneumonitis were shown on the chest roentgenogram. She received gamma-globulin administration, methylprednisolone pulse therapy, and mechanical ventilation. However, hypoxia developed rapidly, and she died of respiratory failure. Autopsy revealed severe interstitial pneumonitis, fibrinous pleuritis, fibrinous pericarditis, and vasculitis in the arcuate artery of the kidney. This is the first report of SLE complicating thrombocytopenia associated with decrease of megakaryocytes and rise of the PA-IgG, and severe leukocytosis associated with increased bone marrow myeloblasts.