BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a prevalent disease of the elderly. Given the progressive aging of the general population, the frequency of the disease will further increase, especially in very old individuals. In a cohort of 70 consecutive AML patients aged over 75 years, we investigated the clinico-hematological characteristics and treatment results. DESIGN AND METHODS: Seventy patients aged > 75 were diagnosed at our institutions as having AML between January 1987 and December 1996. This figure represents 8% of the whole AML patient population observed during the same period. These patients were studied concerning the main clinical and hematological features at presentation, therapeutic approach and clinical outcome. RESULTS: A myelodysplastic syndrome preceded the onset of AML in 10 patients (14%). Trilinear myelodysplasia was present in 28 patients (40%). Hypocellular leukemia was diagnosed in 12 cases (17%). An active infection was found in 12 patients (17%). Aggressive chemotherapy was given to 22 patients (31%), low-dose ARA-C (LDARA-C) to 7 patients (10%), while 41 (58%) were managed with supportive care and/or hydroxyurea (HU). Therapeutic choice was significantly influenced by performance status (p = .03), infections (p = .0001), severe co-morbid disease (p = .0001), and hypocellular AML diagnosis (p = .0001). Complete remission (CR) was obtained in 7/22 patients aggressively treated (32%), 0/7 in the LD-ARA-C group, and in one patient treated with HU. The median survival for the whole patient population was 18 weeks. There was no significant difference among the three treatment groups. However, patients achieving CR experienced significantly longer survival as did those with hypocellular leukemia. INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: In spite of a relevant selection at diagnosis, intensive chemotherapy is not appropriate for the majority of very old patients with AML. However, since a minority of patients takes substantial advantage from an aggressive approach, any effort should be made to preliminarily identify this subset at diagnosis.