Early clinical trials of growth factor augmentation of induction chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia have yielded variable results. To test the hypothesis that this heterogeneity is a consequence of the pleiotropic effects of growth factors on leukemic cell biology, we measured the effects of in vivo interleukin 3 (IL-3) administration on leukemic cell proliferation and drug sensitivity. Thirty-four patients with acute myeloid leukemia with high-risk features or advanced myelodysplasia received IL-3 as a continuous infusion beginning 3 days prior to chemotherapy and continuing for the duration of intensive induction therapy. Bone marrow cells were studied prior to and after 3 days of IL-3 administration to assess changes in overall and leukemic progenitor cell [leukemia colony-forming unit (CFU-L)] proliferation, and progenitor cell sensitivity to 1-betad-arabinofuranosylcytosine. The median fold increase in overall leukemic cell proliferation in response to IL-3, assessed as expression of the nuclear antigen Ki67 in 28 patients, was 1.2. The median fold increase in percentage of cells in S phase (assessed in 29 patients) was 1.3. Despite the increase in overall cell proliferation in 70% of cases, CFU-L number increased in only 4 of 20 patients successfully studied (median day 4:day 1 ratio of CFU-L number, 0.6). While this suggests possible terminal differentiation of leukemic progenitor cells, expression of CD34, HLA-DR, c-kit, CD15, and CD14 were not consistently affected by the cytokine. 1-betad-Arabinofuranosylcytosine sensitivity of CFU-L increased significantly in 30% of cases, decreased in 30%, and was unchanged in 40%. Changes in overall cell proliferation (Ki67 expression) and CFU-L were independent predictors of change in 1-beta-d-arabinofuranosylcytosine sensitivity; increase in percentage of cells in S phase in response to IL-3 was correlated with attainment of complete remission. While these findings support the concept of cell cycle recruitment, IL-3 has marked pleiotropic effects on proliferation, differentiation, and survival of leukemic progenitors which make the clinical impact of in vivo cytokine administration for individual patients difficult to predict.