During the period from 1995 to 1997, we studied 19 new cases of therapy-related myelodysplasia (t-MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML), extending our series to 180 consecutive cases: 123 patients with t-MDS and 57 patients with t-AML. Cytogenetically unrelated clones were observed in 13 patients: 11 patients with two unrelated clones, one patient with three unrelated clones, and one patient with four unrelated clones. Twelve cases of unrelated clones presented as t-MDS, whereas only one case presented as overt t-AML. Partial or complete deletions of the long arms or monosomy for chromosome 5 or chromosome 7, which are characteristic of t-MDS and t-AML, were observed in both unrelated clones in four patients and in one unrelated clone only in six patients, whereas three patients showed aberrations in both clones that were uncharacteristic of t-MDS or t-AML. Three different interpretations of the origin and significance of cytogenetically unrelated clones in t-MDS and t-AML are presented, although the disease is still considered to be monoclonal. First, patients with different defects of the long arm of chromosome 5 or chromosome 7 in two unrelated clones often seem to have acquired these aberrations as independent events. For this reason, it is possible that they may play an important role in leukemic transformation, for instance, by activating or potentiating the effect of a genetic change that is present in all cells but not disclosed as a visible chromosome abnormality. In cases with involvement of other chromosomes, unrelated clones sometimes develop by cytogenetic change in only a subclone of cells, indicating that they play a role only in tumor progression. Finally, unrelated clones in t-MDS and t-AML may represent two different monoclonal diseases: the primary tumor and t-MDS. This view is supported by the significant excess of unrelated clones observed in t-MDS following multiple myeloma (4 in 13 cases) compared with other diseases (9 in 167 cases; P = 0.02), and by results from a case with a balanced translocation that is highly characteristic of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in one clone and a t-MDS-associated deletion of the long arm of chromosome 5 in another.