INTRODUCTION: Compared to conventional endoscopy, capsule endoscopy (CE) is potentially safer, non-invasive, performed in out-patients and may be an alternative first line investigation in patients with suspected inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). In colon CE (CCE), a dormant mode (to save battery) is followed by device activation when small bowel mucosa is recognised. In this pilot study patients with suspected small and/or large bowel disease underwent a pan-enteric assessment using combined small bowel (SBCE) and CCE. METHODS: Patients underwent combined SCE and CCE using a novel protocol. Patients had new GI symptoms (group A: symptoms alone or those with additional abnormal results - GI symptoms plus) or underwent assessment of known IBD (group B). Main outcome measures: diagnostic yield (relevant findings only), complications, CE completion rates and colon cleanliness (scored 1-4: excellent to poor). RESULTS: Patients (group A, n = 56; group B, n = 26; mean age 41) had refused (50%), had incomplete (21%) prior colonoscopy or chose to have CCE (29%). Group A patients had diarrhoea (62%) and abdominal pain (54%); 17 had GI symptoms plus anaemia (13), acute phase response (9), hypoalbuminaemia (4), radiological abnormalities (3). Mean SBCE and CCE SB examination times: 255 and 92 mins respectively. Mean C examination time: 167mins; median cleanliness score 2. SBCE was complete in 73 (89%) and CCE in 58 patients (71%). In group B, pathology was identified in 62%, 16/26 (all active Crohn's) which was significantly higher than in Group A (20%: 11/56, p = 0.0003). New diagnoses in Group A: Crohn's disease (n = 5) and one each of NSAID colitis, proctitis, leiomyoma, angioectasia, diverticulae and idiopathic ulcerated small bowel stricture. 9/11 were in the symptoms plus group. 95% of pathology identified on SBCE was also identified on CCE. No complications were reported. CONCLUSION: 62% of patients known to have IBD had active disease, but diagnostic yield was as high as 20% in those with new symptoms. IBD was the commonest and no complications occurred. Studies of the respective roles of faecal biomarkers, CE and histology in the diagnosis of IBD are needed. Almost all small bowel pathology was recognised by CCE suggesting its use as a remote panenteric endoscopic tool only awaits further battery development. DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST: None Declared.