Although the cerebral blood flow dynamics in cerebral infarction has already been studied by many investigators, the CSF flow dynamics in cerebral infarction has not been well discussed. The purpose of this paper is to investigate CSF flow dynamics in chronic cerebral infarction by RI cisternography and our new quantitative method. In 12 patients with cerebral infarction, the flow of CSF was estimated following intrathecal injection of 169Yb-DTPA or 111In-DTPA. In this study, in addition to the conventional cisternograms, quantitative evaluation of CSF flow was performed in 6 patients by our method. Our previous work included the quantitative CSF flow dynamics in 26 various cerebral disorders using RI Anger camera. This method consisted of following procedure: 30 minutes after RI injection, RI activity was studied continuously for 30 minutes, afterwards playing back the record to calculate the changes of RI activity in the optimal regions of interest. These operations were performed with Anger camera, accessory digital ratemeter and tape-recorder. The changes of RI activity which appeared to be linear is called flow rate in our study for convenience. In this report, the region of interest was selected at Sylvian cistern. 6 patients had abnormal cisternograms consisting of reflux of tracer into the ventricle and delayed migration of tracer to the basal cisterns and diminished flow of tracer in the affected hemisphers. In 5 patients whose cisternograms could not demonstrate the laterality of RI perfsion over the cerebral hemishere, a marked difference of flow rate between right and left Sylvian cisterns was found. These findings probably indicated the correlation between cerebral blood flow dynamics and CSF flow dynamics in cerebral infarction. Moreover, it was confirmed that our method could be of clinical use to evaluate CSF flow dynamics quantitatively. The possible mechanisms of CSF flow disturbance in the affected hemisphere following cerebral infarction was discussed.