In order to epidemiologically clarify the relationships between the funduscopic findings and occurrence of cerebrovascular diseases, an analysis of 68 cerebral hemorrhage, 47 cerebral thrombosis and 230 controls in two rural Akabane and Asahi towns in Japan was accomplished and the results were as follows: 1. Among the fundamental funduscopic findings, irregular constriction, narrowing and retinal bleeding were high risk factors of cerebral hemorrhage in due order. Arteriolar reflex lateral displacement, irregular constriction, tapering, vertical displacement, white plaque and retinal bleeding were high risk factors of cerebral thrombosis in the order listed. Sheathing of arteriole was significantly related to the occurrence of cerebrovascular diseases. 2. Risk of cerebral hemorrhage was significant and highest in grade 3 of Scheie's hypertensive and Keith-Wagener's classifications. Grade 3 of Scheie's hypertensive and Keith-Wagener's classifications of cerebral thrombosis revealed the highest O/E ratio but was insignificant. 3. As is to be expected, the higher the grade of each funduscopic finding and the classifications of the retinal findings, the higher the risk of occurrence of cerebrovascular diseases. 4. Three or more, bright red color and large plaque shape of retinal bleeding in the upper and lower temporal areas were more indicative of future cerebrovascular diseases than in other area, and one or two, dark red color or smaller bleeding. 5. Arterial blood pressure was significantly related to the occurrence of cerebral hemorrhage and thrombosis. Albuminuria was also significantly related to the occurrence of cerebral hemorrhage, but glycosuria was not found to have an important relation to the occurrence of cerebral hemorrhage. The relationship between serum cholesterol level and cerebrovascular diseases was insignificant. 6. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure and albuminuria were more important than the funduscopic findings for prospecting the occurrence of cerebral hemorrhage, and on the contrary, the funduscopic findings were more important than systolic and diastolic blood pressure and other findings for prospecting the occurrence of cerebral thrombosis.