The diseases of vessels, mainly of those in brain are one of the most serious problems of the medical practice. The encephalomalacia or cerebral infarctions are usually caused by transient or permanent obstruction of the brain arteries lumen. Beside local dysfunction of vessels the obstructions could be based on embolic events originating in the heart. Such an obstructions are resulting in global and focal cerebral ischaemias. Arterial occlusion results in cerebral ischaemia and the lack of oxygen (anoxia) which leads to reversible or irreversible injury of the nervous cells in the ischaemic region. The local cell injury or cell death causes attraction of macrophages invading into the devitalized tissue within 72-96 hours after the beginning of the ischaemia. The aim of this study was to find out the correlation between asymptomatic or symptomatic course regarding localisation of the ischaemic lesions in the cerebral tissue. Our anatomical findings were collected from 318 autopsies, and reports on postmortem examinations during the period between September-December 1998. The grossing of the brain was carried out by using of Virchow's method. Atherosclerosis, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus were found to be the main risk factors for the production of focal cerebral ischaemia. Of those patients with focal cerebral ischaemia atherosclerosis had 87.5%, 44.3% were suffering from hypertension, and 25% from diabetes mellitus. The focal ischaemia analysed in this study originated from arterial stenosis or thromboembolic obstructions. We divided the lesions into 3 groups according to their size. The most frequently apparent lesions (72%) were the small cysts (0-10 mm in diameter)-lacunae. The majority of them (90%) was found in the basal ganglia. The second group consisted of postmalatic pseudocysts (10-30 mm in diameter), and the third group was represented by encephalomalatic lesions which were larger than 30 mm. Cerebral ischaemic lesions were present in 27.8% of the studied cases. Nevertheless, more than the half (56.8%) of the affected brains (postmalatic pseudocysts, lacunae and malaciae) belongs to the group of patients who were clinically asymptomatic. The asymptomatic lesions, having negative results in the patient's history, and the clinical course were localised mainly in the basal ganglia of both sides and in the frontal part of the right (nondominant) hemisphere.