OBJECTIVES: Cognitive deficits occur in up to 80% of patients after cardiac surgery. We investigated the influence of cerebral perfusion and embolization during cardiopulmonary bypass on cognitive function and recovery. METHODS: Cerebrovascular reactivity was measured in 70 patients before coronary operations in which nonpulsatile bypass was used. Throughout the operations, middle cerebral artery flow velocity and embolization were recorded by transcranial Doppler and regional oxygen saturation was recorded by near-infrared spectroscopy. Cognitive function was measured by a computerized battery of tests before the operation and 1 week, 2 months, and 6 months after surgery. Elderly patients undergoing urologic surgery served as controls. RESULTS: Cerebrovascular reactivity was impaired preoperatively in 49 patients. Median (interquartile range) regional cerebral oxygen saturation fell during bypass by 10% (6%-15%), indicating increased oxygen extraction, whereas mean middle cerebral flow velocity increased significantly by a median of 6 cm/s (both P <.0001, Wilcoxon), suggesting increased arterial tone. More than 200 emboli were detected in 40 patients, mainly on aortic clamping and release, when bypass was initiated, and during defibrillation. Cognitive function deteriorated more in patients having cardiopulmonary bypass than in control patients having urologic operations but recovered in most tests by 2 months. Measures of cerebral perfusion (poor cerebrovascular reactivity, low arterial pressures, and flow velocity in the middle cerebral artery) predicted poor attention at 1 week (r = 0.3, P <.01, Spearman). Emboli were associated with memory loss (r = 0.3, P <.02, Spearman). CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive deficits were common after cardiopulmonary bypass. Occult cerebrovascular disease was more severe than expected and predisposed to attention difficulties, whereas emboli caused memory deficits. We believe this to be the first report of differing cognitive effects from emboli and hypoperfusion.