BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stenting of internal carotid artery stenosis has been increasingly practiced as an alternative to carotid embolectomy, particularly since the development of cerebral protection devices. 100 consecutive elective percutaneous carotid stenting procedures were carried out in our centre. We here present the clinical outcome and follow-up of these patients. PATIENTS AND METHODS: 69 men and 22 women, average age 69 +/- 10 years with symptomatic (41 %) or asymptomatic and progressive (59 %) > 80 % stenosis of the internal carotid artery were treated. There was a high rate of co-morbidity and a high vascular risk. 64 % would have been excluded from the NASCET trial because of one, 31 % because of two or more contraindications. In 84 % of the patients symptomatic coronary artery disease was present, in 13 % a significantly reduced left ventricular function (LVEF < 40 %).Pre- and post-procedure all patients were given aspirin and clopidogrel and examined by an independent neurologist. 99 stents were placed with the use of an embolic protection device (28 times with distal balloon occlusion, 72 times with a filter device).The follow-up period averaged 10.4 +/- 8.2.(1 - 29 months). RESULTS: The angiographic success rate was 99 %. During the procedure transient neurological symptoms were experienced by 4 % of patients (2x TIA,2x PRIND) and a minor stroke resulted in two. In 90 % of the interventions debris was collected from the embolic protection device. The maximum diameter of particles was 311+/-431 (30 - 1850) micro m. There was some correlation between patients' symptoms prior to stent implantation and maximum particle size (p < 0,04),but none with any other angiographic or clinical parameters. The combined endpoint (death and any stroke) after 30 days occurred 5 times (5 %). A subacute stent thrombosis occurred once, restenosis in two patients. CONCLUSION: Carotid artery stenting with use of a distal embolic protection device is a feasible new alternative to carotid endarterectomy. Our results indicate high success rate and low complication rates, even in patients with severe co-morbidity. The results compare well with surgical figures. Our favourable results are supported by data emerging from current randomized multicenter trials and a large therapy registry. However, long-term follow-up will still be required.