AIMS: Infective endocarditis (IE) is more and more frequent in elderly persons and it has been associated with various clinical, bacteriological, and prognostic features. The aim of the study was to define the clinical, echographic, and prognostic characteristics of IE in a large population of elderly patients from four European centres (three French, one Italian). METHODS AND RESULTS: Three hundred and fifteen consecutive patients with definite IE underwent clinical evaluation, echocardiography, blood cultures, and follow-up. Patients were separated into three groups: group A: 117 patients aged <50 years, group B: 111 patients aged >50 and <70 years, group C: 87 patients aged >70 years. Elderly patients (group C) presented more frequently than other groups with digestive or urinary portal of entry, pacemaker endocarditis, and anaemia. S bovis endocarditis was less frequent and S aureus endocarditis more frequent in younger (group A) patients than in other groups. No difference was observed among groups concerning echocardiographic data as well as the incidence and localization of embolic events. Elderly patients were operated on as frequently as younger patients and their operative risk was similar than in other groups (11%, 3%, and 5% in groups C, B, and A, respectively, P=ns). Overall mortality in elderly patients was low (17%) but significantly higher than in younger patients (10% in group A, 7% in group B, P=0.02). By multivariate analysis, the only risk factors for in-hospital mortality were age (P=0.003), prosthetic valve (P=0.002), and cerebral embolism (P=0.006). Conversely, surgical management was associated with a lower in-hospital mortality (P=0.03). CONCLUSIONS: In this largest series of elderly patients with IE, IE in elderly carries specific features when compared with younger patients, although the echographic characteristics and embolic risk are similar. The overall mortality rate in elderly patients is higher than in younger, but the mortality in operated patients is low and similar than that of younger patients.