OBJECTIVE: Improved visualization of intraaneurysmal thrombi can contribute to understanding their impact on clinical courses and treatments. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) demonstrates the hemodynamic portion of aneurysm domes and vasculature structures and has been considered by many to be the principal technique used for aneurysm diagnosis. An intraaneurysmal thrombus may be visualized as a filling defect on DSA, but DSA does not reliably indicate the presence of an intraaneurysmal thrombus or its details. Computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging may have advantages over DSA, particularly because of their capacity to visualize soft tissue. Hence, we investigated the reconstruction of MR and CT images and compared it to DSA for assessment of intraaneurysmal thrombi. METHODS: Thirty-one patients with 34 aneurysms were enrolled. The entire group was examined with DSA. Sixteen cases were also examined with MR imaging; the remaining 15 were examined with CT imaging. Images of intraaneurysmal thrombi were rendered from corresponding MRI and soft tissue scans using CT. Intracranial vessels and aneurysms were defined from MR and CT angiography. Whole images were linked via imaging software for the reconstruction of vasculature structures. Images were superimposed to produce visualizations of thrombi situated in aneurysmal bodies. RESULTS: Reconstruction of the MR and CT images clearly demonstrated the presence and details of intraaneurysmal thrombi in 9 (26.4 %) of 34 aneurysms. DSA detected only 4 (11.7 %) of the cases as a filling defect. Significant differences in thrombus visualization were observed between DSA used alone or in conjunction with either MRA (P = .02) or CTA (P = .04) images. Mean volume of thrombosed aneurysms was 3.2 +/- 0.84 mL (mean +/- SEM) and thrombosis volume was 0.9 +/- 0.31 mL. Aneurysm and nested thrombus volumes were highly correlated (r = 0.987; P < .001). CONCLUSION: Intraaneurysmal thrombi were clearly visualized by computerized MR and CT image reconstruction. MR and CT were superior to DSA alone in demonstrating the presence of intra-aneurysmal thrombi. Computer-assisted 3-D visualization can be invaluable in understanding the shape and volume of intraaneurysmal thrombi, which may contribute to more accurate assessment and effective treatment of aneurysms cases.