 OBJECTIVE: To analyze and summarize the clinical characteristics and risk factors for patients with hemorrhagic transformation (HT) after cerebral infarction to provide guidance for its clinical treatment and prevention. METHODS: In this study, data from 49 hospitalized patients with HT in the First Department of Neurology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University from October 2009 to March 2012, were reviewed retrospectively and 106 cases with acute cerebral infarction only during the same period, were chosen randomly as controls. Gender and age of the patients were comparable. Relevant information was collected. SPSS 17.0 statistical package was applied for data processing. Qualitative data were processed with χ(2) test, and measurable data was processed with t-test. Each index was analyzed with uni-variate analysis while statistically significant risk factors were included in the logistic review model to conduct the multivariate regression analysis. RESULTS: (1) Clinical symptoms deteriorating after hemorrhage in 21 cases accounted for 42.9% of the HT group, among which the cases on degree of disturbance to consciousness had an aggravation in 8 cases and hemiplegia increase in another 7 cases. Headaches and dizziness were found in 5 cases. (2) Number of infarction within 15 days after the occurrence of HT accounted for 87.0%. (3) HT-related factors increased the risk of HT in cerebral infarction such as cortical infarction, large area of infarction, atrial fibrillation, cerebral embolism, diabetes and high level of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (P < 0.05). The most important factors were atrial fibrillation and cerebral embolism. (4) PH-2 seemed more unlikely to link with clinical symptoms than other subtypes of HT. CONCLUSION: Cerebral infarction after occlusion of the main artery trunk was prone to HT, especially when it appeared within 15 days. Short-term prognosis seemed to be related to the subtypes of HT, with risk factors as cortical infarct, massive cerebral infarction, atrial fibrillation, cerebral embolism, diabetes, high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol etc. on HT.