To study the effects of antithrombotic therapy in experimental stroke, we have characterized a baboon model of acute cerebrovascular thrombosis. In this model an inflatable silastic balloon cuff has been implanted by transorbital approach around the right middle cerebral artery (MCA), proximal to the take-off of the lenticulostriate arteries (LSA). Inflation of the balloon for 3 hours in six animals produced a stereotypic sustained stroke syndrome characterized by contralateral hemiparesis. An infarction volume of 3.2 +/- 1.5 cm3 in the ipsilateral corpus striatum was documented by computerized tomographic (CT) scanning at 10 days following stroke induction and 3.9 +/- 1.9 cm3 (n = 4) at 14 days by morphometric neuropathologic determinations of brain specimens fixed in situ by pressure-perfusion with 10% buffered formalin. Immediate pressure-perfusion fixation following deflation of the balloon was performed in 16 additional animals given Evans blue dye intravenously prior to the 3 hour MCA balloon occlusion. Light microscopy and transmission electron microscopy consistently confirmed the presence of thrombotic material occluding microcirculatory branches of the right LSA in the region of Evans blue stain, but not those of the contralateral corpus striatum. When autologous 111In-platelets were infused intravenously in four animals from the above group prior to the transient 3 hour occlusion of the right MCA, gamma scintillation camera imaging of each perfused-fixed whole brain demonstrated the presence of a single residual focus of 111In-platelet activity involving only the Evans blue-stained right corpus striatum. Focal right hemispheric activity was equivalent to 0.55 +/- 0.49 ml of whole blood, and the occlusion score derived from histologic examination of the microcirculation of the Evans blue-stained corpus striatum averaged 34.8 +/- 2.8. Similar 111In-platelet imaging and histologic scoring experiments carried out in four animals pretreated with the antithrombotic combination heparin and ticlopidine showed marked reduction of both 111In-platelet activity (0.01 +/- 0.03 ml vs. 0.55 +/- 0.49 ml; p less than 0.01) and thrombotic occlusion of the microcirculation (10.8 +/- 7.4 units vs. 34.8 +/- 2.8 units; p less than 0.01) in the right corpus striatum following 3 hours of MCA occlusion. In separate control experiments 111In-labeled autologous platelets were infused after the 3 hour period of right MCA occlusion and subsequent balloon deflation in two animals; no focus of 111In-platelet activity was demonstrated in fixed whole brain.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)