BACKGROUND: Thromboembolic complications after electrical cardioversion (CV) of atrial fibrillation (AF) have been attributed to the dislodgment of preexistent left atrial thrombus during the resumption of atrial contraction. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) has been used to identify patients without thrombus, who potentially could undergo CV without anticoagulation. However, embolic events after CV in patients without evidence of thrombus on TEE have recently been reported. AIM OF THE STUDY: To evaluate if absence of thrombi or prethrombotic conditions such as spontaneous echo contrast or left atrial appendage disfunction can justify electrical CV without anticoagulant therapy. METHODS: Seventy-four patients with AF and candidates for CV underwent monoplane TEE. Patients were cardioverted without anticoagulation in case of: 1) absence of thrombus and/or spontaneous echocardiographic contrast and 2) good visualization of left atrial appendage, with a well defined peak blood flow velocity greater than 20 cm/sec. In all other cases, patients underwent anticoagulant therapy which started 3 weeks before CV and continued for 4 weeks afterwards. RESULTS: Forty-six patients, without thrombus or "prethrombotic" conditions, did not receive anticoagulation, while 28 followed traditional therapy with warfarin. Four patients with a thrombus in the left atrial appendage were identified: 1 died of cerebral embolism 3 days after the beginning of anticoagulation, in another one CV was definitely deferred because of the persistence of thrombus after 1 month of warfarin therapy. One patient, with left atrial appendage disfunction, died suddenly after 5 days of anticoagulation. Two patients reverted spontaneously in sinus rhythm. Two patients refused electrical CV. The remaining 67 patients underwent electrical CV which was successful in 56 of them. Cerebral embolism occurred 24 hours after CV in one patient who did not receive anticoagulation. Repeat TEE soon after embolism showed absence of thrombus or spontaneous echo contrast, but the presence of low flow velocity in the left atrial appendage. CONCLUSIONS: In patients in AF candidates for CV, exclusion of thrombi or prethrombotic conditions by TEE does not exclude the risk of thromboembolic events and the need for anticoagulant therapy. Left atrial appendage function can be stunned or impaired immediately after CV, favouring a thrombogenic milieu and subsequent embolic events. Therapeutic anticoagulation at the time of as well as after cardioversion is actually recommended.