BACKGROUND: Recent identification of mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7), a major responsible gene for HCM, has provided the opportunity to characterize genotype-phenotype correlation in HCM families. In this study we analysed the phenotypic expression of two beta-myosin heavy chain (beta MHC) mutations in three unrelated HCM families. METHODS: Living individuals from three unrelated HCM families (Families 1, 2, and 3) were screened by history, physical examination, electrocardiography, and two-dimensional echocardiography. Blood was collected from all individuals for DNA extraction. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction endonuclease digestion and chemical cleavage were utilized for detection of mutations. All mutations were confirmed by sequence analysis. RESULTS: Identification of mutations: A missense mutation in exon 13 of the beta MHC gene (Arg403 Gln) was detected in HCM patients from Families 1 and 2. PCR amplification of the exon 13 DNA, followed by Ddel digestion of the PCR product and gel electrophoresis, showed two fragments of 84 and 70 bp in normal individuals and four fragments of 84, 70, 52 and 32 bp in HCM patients. Sequence analysis showed substitution of an adenine for guanine at coding position 1208. In Family 3, a missense mutation in exon 16 of the beta MHC gene (Val606 Met) was detected in HCM patients. Chemical cleavage of the PCR products showed an uncleaved product of 337 bp in the normal individuals, while in the affected individuals, in addition to the uncleaved product, a 90 bp cleaved product was also detected, indicating the presence of a mismatch in one allele. Sequence analysis showed substitution of an adenine for guanine in coding position 1817. CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Seven members of Family 1 had HCM, of whom five are alive. One patient died from sudden cardiac death (SCD) and another from recurrent cerebral emboli. In Family 2, 15 individuals had HCM of whom nine have died, seven from SCD. The mean age at the time of SCD was 33 years. The third family is comprised of 11 affected individuals and one obligate carrier, of whom one patient died at age 17 from progressive heart failure. Two additional individuals in this family have also succumbed to SCD to age 60. A variety of clinical and echocardiographic manifestations of HCM were present in each family. Logrank test of Kaplan-Meier survival curves indicates that Arg403 Gln mutation was associated with a poor prognosis in HCM families as compared to Val606 Met (P = 0.034). CONCLUSIONS: beta MHC mutations despite showing variable clinical and echocardiographic manifestations of HCM are predictors of survival in HCM families.