Percutaneous cardiopulmonary assist devices (PCPS) have become available in interventional cardiology within recent years. These tools offer the opportunity of performing percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) in high-risk patients characterized by significant stenoses of several coronary arteries and a poor left ventricular function. It is unclear for which patients PCPS are necessary and which patients will profit by PTCA as compared to coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). Therefore, the anticipated risk of CABG and of PTCA without assist devices was calculated according to risk scores and compared with our results of assisted PTCA. In addition the long-term survival rate was investigated. In 35 patients (mean 65.5 years of age, 12 females, 23 males), we performed PTCA concomitant with the use of cardiac assist devices. The indications for the use of a cardiac assist device were severely impaired LV function (EF 30% +/- 8.9%) in combination with significant coronary artery disease (2.7 +/- 0.3 vessels) and a significant supply area of the vessel to be dilated. In 6 patients, PCPS was started before coronary angioplasty because of hemodynamic instability. In 21 cases, PCPS was on a standby basis without being connected to the patient's circulation. In 8 patients, a left heart assist device, the 14F-Hemopump, was inserted percutaneously. The patients were analyzed using risk scores of angioplasty and of coronary bypass graft surgery. The calculated risk of hemodynamic compromise during PTCA according to the risk scores was more than 50%. The anticipated risk of a fatal outcome following CABG would have been 19.8%. PTCA was performed on an average of 2.0 coronary arteries per patient and was successful in 85%. We observed a decline in angina pectoris classification (CCS) from 3.5 to 1.6. An average reduction of 1.1 NYHA class was achieved. The in-hospital mortality was 8.6% (3 patients: 1 x sepsis, 1 x early reocclusion, 1 x cerebral embolism). At 24 months follow-up, a re-PTCA was necessary in four cases because of restenosis. In the remainder, NYHA and CCS class were stable during the follow-up period. An additional five patients died during the first year and two patients in the second year. We conclude that PTCA with the use of a cardiac assist device shows favorable short-term results in a subset of patients with extended coronary artery disease and severely impaired LV function who are not suitable for nonsupported PTCA or CABG due to their risk profile. However, the long term results are not satisfying and stress the need for complete revascularisation with CABG once the patient's condition is stabilized by means of supported PTCA.