OBJECTIVE: Perioperative factors affecting the outcomes of postoperative brain function in patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm were demonstrated. PATIENTS AND METHODS: From December 1977 to September 1994, 745 patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm underwent 846 operations. The mean age at surgery was 57.1 +/- 14.2 years old. Four hundred seventy-four patients had true aneurysm and 372 had aortic dissection. Two hundred forty-four patients underwent repair in the ascending aorta, 189 arch repair, 242 repair in the descending aorta. 79 replacement of the thoracoabdominal aorta, and 92 extra-anatomical bypass or thrombo-exclusion of the aorta. Conventional cardiopulmonary bypass was used in 297 patients, partial cardiopulmonary bypass through femoral access in 167, selective cerebral perfusion in 253, deep hypothermic circulatory arrest and retrograde cerebral perfusion in 50, temporary shunt in 29, and no circulatory support was applied in 50. Postoperative cerebral complications were divided into permanent cerebral dysfunction. RESULTS: The early mortality rate was 15.5% (131 patients). Incremental risk factors for hospital mortality were non-preexisting cardiac lesions, ruptured aneurysm, postoperative cerebral complications, sepsis, bleeding, low output syndrome and renal failure. Cerebral complications occurred in 81 patients (9.6%), involving 47 permanent and 34 transient sequelae. The early mortality rate in patients with postoperative brain damage was 42.0%. The etiologies of the brain damage diagnosed by computed tomography were embolism in 41 patients, cerebral hypoperfusion in 16 and unknown in 24. Incremental risk factors for postoperative cerebral complications were: operation early in the series advanced age at surgery, preoperative renal failure, aortic arch lesions, atherosclerotic aneurysm, aortic arch procedures and clamping of the aortic arch. CONCLUSIONS: Although there was an increased incidence of advanced age and complex lesions in patients with aortic aneurysm, an improvement in surgical results has recently been achieved using advanced diagnostic and surgical techniques.