OBJECTIVE: This paper was undertaken to determine the long-term outcome of active infective endocarditis treated with antibiotic and radical excision of infected tissues by surgery. METHODS: From October 1978 to August 1994, 122 consecutive patients were operated on during the acute phase of infective endocarditis. There were 85 men and 37 women whose mean age was 50 years, ranging from 20 to 79. Surgery was needed because of one or more of the following complications: cardiogenic/septic shock in 19 patients, congestive heart failure in 68, persistent sepsis in 64, peripheral embolization in 20, and cerebral embolization in 10. The offending microorganism was identified in 110 patients, staphylococci were the most common ones. Seventy-six patients had native valve endocarditis and 46 had prosthetic valve endocarditis. Simple valve replacement or repair was performed in 60 patients and radical resection of the valve and surrounding tissues with reconstruction of the heart with either fresh autologous pericardium or glutaraldehyde-fixed bovine pericardium was performed in 62 with paravalvular abscess. Pulmonary autograft and aortic homograft were used in only three patients, the remaining patients had either bioprostheses or mechanical heart valves if valve repair was not feasible. RESULTS: There were nine deaths, for an operative mortality of 7.4%. Logistic regression analysis identified preoperative shock and renal failure as predictors of operative mortality. Operative survivors were followed up from 4 to 173 months, mean of 56.4. The actuarial survival at 10 years was 61 +/- 6%. Logistic regression analysis identified preoperative New York Heart Association functional class IV and perioperative renal failure as predictors of late mortality. Eight patients developed recurrent endocarditis 10-102 months postoperatively. The freedom from recurrent endocarditis at 10 years was 79 +/- 9%. All patients who developed this late complication had paravalvular abscess at the time of original operation. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that surgery for active infective endocarditis yield a high probability of eradicating the infection with relatively low operative mortality and good long-term results.