Transesophageal echocardiography visualizes the left atrium, the left atrial appendage, thrombi and spontaneous echo contrast within them. The role of these findings as predictors for embolism in atrial fibrillation is unknown. We performed transesophageal echocardiography in 409 non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation outpatients (62 +/- 12 years, 36% female) with no recent (< 1 year) history of embolism. Patients with left atrial/appendage thrombi received oral anticoagulation, those without thrombi Aspirin. The patients were followed up over 2 years. Primary events were stroke, embolism and non stroke/embolism related deaths. Secondary events were initiation of anticoagulation in patients primarily assigned to Aspirin. Left atrial/appendage thrombi were diagnosed in 2.5%. They were associated with diabetes, heart failure and decreased left ventricular fractional shortening (p < 0.05 for each variable). Spontaneous echo contrast was diagnosed in 12%. It was associated with increased age, constant atrial fibrillation, hypertension, heart failure, valvular abnormalities and increased left atrial diameter (p < 0.05 for each variable). Increased left atrial appendage size was associated with constant atrial fibrillation, etiology of atrial fibrillation and valvular abnormalities (p < 0.05 for each variable). Follow-up was 25 +/- 7 months. 29 patients suffered a stroke, 33 further patients died of non stroke/embolism related causes. Secondary events occurred in 19 patients. Neither left atrial/appendage thrombi nor left atrial appendage size were predictors for embolism. Predictors for embolism were increased age (p = 0.003), hypertension (p = 0.01) and increased diastolic blood pressure (p = 0.04). In non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation outpatients with no recent history of embolism, transesophageal echocardiography is of limited value to assess embolic risk. Hypertension and increased diastolic blood pressure have been confirmed in their significance as clinical predictors for embolism.