Ischemia causes long-term effects on brain volume and neurologic function but the relationship between the two is poorly characterized. We studied the relationships between brain volume and three measures of rodent behavior after cerebral ischemia was induced by injecting several thousand microspheres into the internal carotid arteries of rats. Forty eight hours later, each subject was rated using a global neurologic rating scale. Several weeks later, the subjects were tested for open field activity and visual spatial learning. Post-mortem we measured the volume of the cerebral hemispheres and estimated the volume densities of cortex, white matter, hippocampus, basal ganglia, thalamus, ventricle, and visible infarction. Ischemia caused significant impairment, as measured by the global rating scale; the probability of an abnormal rating was correlated with the number of microspheres trapped in the brains. Visual spatial learning was significantly impaired by ischemia, but this deficit was independent of the count of microspheres, whether the subject was abnormal at 48 h, and whether the left or right hemisphere was embolized. Cerebral hemisphere volume was reduced from 430 mm3 to 376 mm3 (P < 0.05). The cortex was reduced from 22 to 19% of cerebrum (P < 0.05) and the white matter compartment was reduced to similar degree. The lesion volume was 6% of cerebrum, comparable to that seen with other ischemia methods. The global outcome rating was significantly related to total cerebral volume, but not to volume changes in any single compartment. On the other hand, visual spatial learning was significantly influenced by volume changes in the cortex and white matter, but not by the topography of the visible infarctions. Open field activity was not altered by infarction. Our data suggests that the total volume of brain tissue lost to infarction may partially determine global neurological rating independently of the topography of the volume loss. Integrative functions such as learning may depend more on the integrity of specific compartments and less on the total volume of intact brain. The volume of visible cystic infarction was not related to long term behavioral outcome. These results should be confirmed using another method of inducing ischemia.