PURPOSE: We describe our therapeutic strategy and correlate the anatomic results and clinical outcomes in patients who received immediate fibrinolytic therapy for thromboembolic complications occurring during endovascular treatment of an intracerebral aneurysm. METHODS: The medical records and angiographic examinations of 19 patients were reviewed. All endovascular procedures were performed with the patients under general anesthesia and fully heparinized. Thirteen patients received an intravenous bolus injection of aspirin. Thromboemboli occurred during catheterization or insertion of embolic material (Guglielmi detachable coils or mechanical detachable spirals) or in the first hours after the intervention. Clot distribution was within the MCA territory in 14 patients, the ACA in three patients, and the basilar trunk in two patients. A continuous intraarterial injection of urokinase was administered immediately, either superselectively distal to the thrombus or selectively within or closely proximal to the thrombus. In nine cases, chemical lysis was combined with mechanical clot fragmentation. Initial anatomic recanalization as well as clinical outcome at 3 months were evaluated. RESULTS: Ten patients showed complete recanalization and nine patients showed partial recanalization. Fourteen patients had a good clinical recovery. One patient was moderately disabled and two were severely disabled according to their scores on the Glasgow outcome scale. Two patients died, one as a consequence of the preexisting subarachnoid hemorrhage and the other because of a large intracerebral hematoma that developed after fibrinolysis. Of the 14 patients with a good clinical outcome, nine exhibited complete recanalization and five partial recanalization. CONCLUSION: Pharmacological thrombolysis seems to be a safe and efficient therapy that facilitates the natural fibrinolytic process, increasing the rate of recanalization in thromboembolic events. Clot fragmentation and superselective drug infusion appear to improve the rate of recanalization. Complete recanalization increases the chance of a better clinical outcome; however, clinical outcome does not always correspond to recanalization and vice versa.