BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Endovascular treatments for aneurysms are being used more frequently in patients in the absence of a large body of information on their histopathological effects. This study determined the efficacy and histopathological effects of treatment of experimental aneurysms with Guglielmi detachable coils (GDC) or cellulose acetate polymer (CAP). METHODS: Fourteen dogs had 13 terminal and 30 sidewall aneurysms created with venous pouches sutured to the cervical carotid arteries. Two weeks later, dogs had angiography followed by randomization to no treatment (n=2) or to aneurysm occlusion with GDC (n=4) or CAP (n=6). Two months later, angiography was repeated, animals were killed, and aneurysms were excised, fixed, photographed, and examined by light and electron microscopy. RESULTS: Two dogs were excluded because of common carotid artery occlusion at 2-week angiography. There were 11 terminal and 16 sidewall aneurysms available for treatment. The rate of spontaneous thrombosis of untreated aneurysms was 0% (0/5). Treatment with GDC showed complete terminal and sidewall aneurysm obliteration rates of 33% (1/3) and 80% (4/5), respectively. Greater than 90% occlusion occurred in the remaining cases. There were no parent or branch artery occlusions. Treatment with CAP showed complete terminal and sidewall aneurysm obliteration rates of 20% (1/5) and 0% (0/5), respectively, and incomplete sidewall aneurysm obliteration in 1 of 5 cases. Aneurysms reformed at 2 months in 2 of 5 terminal and 1 of 5 sidewall cases. There were parent or branch artery occlusions with CAP in 2 and 4 cases, respectively. The rate of aneurysm occlusion was significantly lower and the rate of arterial occlusion significantly higher with CAP than with GDC (P<.05). Histopathology showed complete endothelialization across the orifice of the aneurysm successfully treated with CAP, whereas aneurysms treated with GDC were significantly more likely to show fresh or organizing thrombus without complete endothelialization (P<.05). CONCLUSIONS: It is concluded that both treatments have limitations. Complete packing of aneurysms with GDC obliterates the aneurysm, but endothelialization does not always occur within 2 months. There are substantial problems with CAP. It is thrombogenic and carries a higher risk of causing arterial thrombosis. Even if an aneurysm is successfully obliterated initially with CAP, the CAP may disappear, leaving the aneurysm completely untreated.