We have reviewed 39 cases of intracranial vascular malformations, observed in the Section of Paediatric Neurosurgery of the Catholic University of Rome between 1980 and 1995 (age 1-15 years). Diagnosis was of parenchimal AVM in 26 cases, in 7 cases of AVM of the Galen region, in 5 cases of dural AVM and in 1 case of venous angioma. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Haemorrhage was the prevalent clinical onset in patients with parenchimal AVMs (57.7% of cases). Only one patient with a Galen region AVM presented cardiovascular symptoms, while 2/5 children observed for a dural AVM complained a congestive heart failure. Total surgical excision was performed in 17 of the 26 patients with parenchimal AVMs; moreover surgery was combined with preoperative endovascular embolization in 2 cases and with radiosurgery in 1 patient; we think that surgery is still the treatment of choice in patients with parenchimal AVMs. Endovascular treatment and radiosurgery have mainly an adjuvant role; nevertheless we agree that a preoperative endovascular management of parenchimal AVMs reduces the surgical risk, especially in cases of huge AVMs or AVMs localized in eloquent areas of the brain. Radiosurgery may be an alternative choice for complex or deeply sited AVMs; however in most cases, a combination with surgery or endovascular treatment is necessary to reduce the "target" size. AVM embolization was the only treatment in 2 of the 6 cases of dural AVMs; dural AVM embolization was combined with surgery in 1 case. Endovascular AVM exclusion is the treatment of choice in these patients. Surgery may be combined with endovascular treatment in case of a partial persistence of the AVM, or if signs of revascularization are present on control angiography. A conservative management is justified in patients with carotido-cavernous fistulae; in fact a complete spontaneous thrombosis is very frequent in these cases. A high rate of cardiovascular symptoms is reported in patients with Galen region AVMs diagnosed in the 1st year of life, but only 1 of our patients complained of congestive cardiac symptoms. Surgical treatment of Galen region AVMs is associated with a high morbidity and mortality. Actually a transarterial embolization of afferent vessels represents the treatment of choice in these patients; it can be combined with transvenous approach in case of complex AVMs and/or a non complete AVM exclusion.