OBJECT: Maintenance of cerebral blood flow (CBF) autoregulation in the brain is of major importance for patient outcome in various clinical conditions. The authors assessed local autoregulation after "asymptomatic" cortical vein occlusion. METHODS: In Wistar rats, a single cortical vein was occluded photochemically by using rose bengal and fiberoptic illumination. In rats with bilateral carotid artery occlusion, mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) was lowered in 5-mm Hg increments down to 40 mm Hg by using hypobaric hypotension. Local CBF at each pressure level was assessed by performing laser Doppler (LD) scanning at 25 (5 x 5) locations within bilateral cranial windows. In this manner, the lower limit of autoregulation (LLA) was detected. The LLA was 60 mm Hg in both right and left hemispheres in Group A (five rats), in which the animals received illumination without rose bengal and had no venous occlusion. Of the 11 rats that underwent vein occlusion, three developed severe reductions in local CBF and/or a growing venous thrombus and were distinguished as Group C (symptomatic; three rats); from previous work we know that those animals are bound to experience venous infarction. The remaining rats formed Group B (asymptomatic; eight rats). In this group the LLA remained at 60 mm Hg in the left hemisphere without occlusion, whereas, in the right cortex with the occluded vein, the LLA was found to be 65 mm Hg. Below a carotid stump pressure of 25 mm Hg regional CBF in the affected hemisphere dropped more abruptly to a possibly ischemic range than that in the opposite normal hemisphere. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study suggest that cerebral venous circulation disorders are manifested via additional pathways, that is, from a partially impaired local autoregulation in the vicinity of the occluded vein, even under conditions in which the vein occlusion itself does not cause brain damage. Care should be taken in the control of blood pressure in patients with this pathological condition.