 OBJECTIVES: Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), or hereditary spinocerebellar ataxia type 3, is the most common dominantly inherited ataxia. However, lower urinary tract (LUT) dysfunction in MJD has not been fully delineated. We investigated LUT dysfunction in MJD by clinical-urodynamic observations. METHODS: In 24 genetically diagnosed MJD, we recruited all 11 patients with LUT symptoms (six men, five women; age, 18-61 [mean 48] years; disease duration, 2-24 [mean 9] years; voiding difficulty, 7, urinary incontinence, 4). Urodynamic studies consisted of uroflowmetry, measurement of post-void residuals and electromyography (EMG)-cystometry. Neurophysiology tests consisted of motor unit potential (MUP) analysis of the sphincter and extremity muscles, tibial nerve somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) and nerve conduction studies (NCS) of the extremities. RESULTS: Urodynamic abnormalities were seen in all 11 patients studied. Maximum or average flow rate was decreased in five. Post-void residual was noted in three but residual urine volume > 100 ml was noted in only one patient. Maximum urethral closure pressure was low in one and high in one of five patients studied. EMG-cystometry during filling showed detrusor overactivity in five, impaired bladder sensation in four, low compliance detrusor in one, uninhibited sphincter relaxation in one and incompetent urethra in one. Voiding phase abnormalities included detrusor areflexia in three and detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia in two. Bethanechol supersensitivity of the bladder was noted in one of three patients studied. Bulbocavernosus reflex was absent in two of five patients studied. MUP analysis showed neurogenic changes in six of nine sphincter muscles and in all six extremity muscles studied. Five patients had prolonged or absent cortical response in SEP and four had sensory axonal neuropathy in NCS, which were relevant to the impaired bladder sensation. CONCLUSION: In the present study, a half of MJD patients had LUT symptoms and they showed various urodynamic abnormalities. Detrusor overactivity, impaired bladder sensation, and neurogenic sphincter EMG were common findings, and large post-void residuals were rare. These findings are relevant to central and peripheral nervous system pathology of MJD.