Non-hereditary olivo-ponto-cerebellar atrophy (OPCA) and striato-nigral degeneration (SND) have been looked upon as a single disease entity called multisystem atrophy (MSA) by Oppenheimer. This study revealed that both intracytoplasmic argyrophilic inclusions (AI) in pontine neurons and glial (argyrophilic) cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) widely distributed in the CNS are characteristics of MSA. MATERIALS: a) 12 cases with MSA, b) 16 cases with autosomal dominant (AD) form of spinocerebellar degeneration (SCD): AD form of OPCA 5 cases, Joseph disease 4 cases, AD-dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy (Naitoh & Oyanagi's form) 6 cases, AD-spastic ataxia (Brown) 1 case, c) 4 cases with autosomal recessive (AR) form of SCD: AR form of OPCA 1 case, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF) 1 case, complicated form of spastic paraplegia 2 cases, d) 6 cases with non-hereditary SCD including intoxications: late cortical cerebellar atrophy 1 case, alcoholic cerebellar degeneration 2 cases, phenytoin-induced cerebellar degeneration 1 case, neuroleptic malignant syndrome 1 case, and e) 27 cases with other neuropsychiatric diseases: Alzheimer disease 20 cases, progressive supranuclear palsy 5 cases, schizophrenia 2 cases. METHOD: We examined 10 mu-thick paraffin sections stained with HE, Klüver-Barrera, Bodian, Holzer, Gallyas, and Bielschowski methods. RESULTS: AI in pontine neurons were found only in two cases of MSA. Interestingly no AI could be detected even in cases with AD form of OPCA showing mild degeneration in the pontocerebellar system. On the other hand, GCIs were found in all cases with MSA irrespective of the degree of degeneration in the olivo-ponto-cerebellar or striato-nigral system. However, there was no GCIs in cases with other form of SCD and other neuropsychiatric diseases. Gallyas stain was the best method for detecting GCIs. GCIs were widely distributed in the CNS except for superficial layers of the cerebral cortex, the cerebellar cortex, and the dorsal column of the spinal cord. There were also many GCIs in the putamen, pontine base, and cerebellar white matter, even though these sites were well preserved.