 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), is characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia and variable findings including a dystonic-rigid syndrome, a parkinsonian syndrome, or a combined syndrome of dystonia and peripheral neuropathy. Neurologic findings tend to evolve as the disease progresses.  DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SCA3 rests on the use of molecular genetic testing to detect an abnormal CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in ATXN3. Affected individuals have alleles with 52 to 86 CAG trinucleotide repeats. Such testing detects 100% of affected individuals and is available in clinical laboratories.  MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management is supportive as no medication slows the course of disease; restless legs syndrome and extrapyramidal syndromes resembling parkinsonism may respond to levodopa or dopamine agonists; spasticity, drooling, and sleep problems respond variably to lioresal, atropine-like drugs, and hypnotic agents; botulinum toxin has been used for dystonia and spasticity; daytime fatigue may respond to psychostimulants such as modafinil; accompanying depression should be treated. Affected individuals should remain active; canes and walkers help prevent falling; motorized scooters can help maintain independence; speech therapy and communication devices may benefit those with dysarthria and dietary modification those with dysphagia; weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help to maintain independence.  Prevention of secondary complications: modification of the home for safety; vitamin supplements if caloric intake is reduced; weight control to facilitate ambulation and mobility; caution with general anesthesia.  Surveillance: annual or biannual assessment of speech, swallowing, and gait function. GENETIC COUNSELING: SCA3 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Offspring of affected individuals have a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation. Prenatal testing is possible for pregnancies at increased risk if the diagnosis has been confirmed in an affected family member. 