The trinucleotide repeat disorders are a heterogeneous group of neurological diseases characterised by a similar genetic mutation. Eight disorders have been previously identified with expansion of a CAG repeat in the protein coding sequence of the disease gene, resulting in pathological expansion of a glutamine tract in the mutated protein. The presence of this common mutation suggests that a similar mechanism may underlie neurodegeneration. Studies1 have shown that mutated protein accumulates in the nuclei of neurons from patients with Machado-Joseph disease, Huntington's disease, and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1, and in transgenic mice expressing mutated ataxin-1 or an amino-terminal fragment of mutated huntingtin. These ubiquitinated intranuclear inclusions contain fibrillar aggregates which form amyloid-like structures in model systems. Large intranuclear aggregates have been observed in neurons and glia in another rare multisystem neurodegenerative disease known as neuronal intranuclear inclusion disease (NIID).2, 3 and 4 This disorder usually affects the young with death by the third decade. Both sporadic and familial cases have been described, and the mode of inheritance is unclear. Patients often present with extrapyramidal signs, lower motor neuron abnormalities, and cognitive or behavioural dysfunction. Neurons of the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems show eosinophilic, ubiquitinated intranuclear inclusions. The similarities between this disease and the CAG repeat disorders prompted us to examine whether expanded polyglutamine tracts could be identified in NIID.Necropsy was done on a 25-year-old woman who died after a 6-year course initially characterised by abnormal eye movements, resting tremor, increased muscle tone, and an extensor plantar response. Although cognitive function was intact, there was a history of behavioural abnormalities. There was no known family history of neurological disease. Her symptoms progressed to akinetic rigidity with occasional dystonic posturing. Postmortem examination revealed widespread eosinophilic ubiquitinated intranuclear inclusions, most readily identifiable within large neurons (figure a, b). Rare (about 1%) nuclear inclusions stained with mononuclonal antibody 1 C2 (figure c), which recognises pathologically expanded polyglutamine tracts.5