BACKGROUND: Diagnosis of Budd-Chiari syndrome (BCS) is often missed unless its possibility has been kept in mind. Obstruction of inferior vena cava (IVC) is reportedly the most frequent cause of BCS in Afro-Asian variety. AIM: An attempt was made to classify BCS (in an eastern Indian population) etiopathologically. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty consecutive cases of BCS presenting over a period of five years were included. Following a thorough physical examination, necessary investigations (including coagulation profile, ultrasonography (with Doppler study) of hepatobiliary tract, hepatic vein and IVC angiography (n = 22) and liver biopsy (n = 26, including autopsy in two cases) were performed. RESULTS: Mean age at presentation was 32.7 +/- 10.36 years (range 12-60 years) with M:F = 21:9. Clinical presentations included, hepatomegaly in 28 (93.3%), ascites in 27 (90%), splenomegaly in 15 (50%), pain in abdomen in 26 (86.6%), jaundice in 10 (33.3%), back veins in 20 (66.6%) and gastrointestinal bleeding in three (10%) cases. Amongst the total of 30 patients, four, six and 20 cases presented as fulminant, acute and chronic BCS respectively. Twenty four cases of BCS could be diagnosed by ultrasonography alone, while the remainder required angiography for diagnosis. IVC and hepatic vein angiography revealed membranous obstruction in nine, partial stricture of IVC in six, and IVC and/or hepatic vein block in others. The etiopathological nature in 30 cases were as follows: idiopathic membranous obstruction in nine (30%), hepatocellular carcinoma in six (20%), idiopathic stricture in six (20%) cases and one case (3.3%) each of the following: cholangiocarcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, chronic pancreatitis, hydatid cyst in liver, protein S deficiency, oral contraceptive use, nephrotic syndrome (with antithrombin III deficiency), polycythemia rubra vera and chronic lymphatic leukemia. CONCLUSION: Idiopathic membranous obstruction and stricture of IVC are the commonest cause of BCS in the eastern part of India. Hepatocellular carcinoma is also a common cause, presenting in the fulminant form. Ultrasonography may be a helpful screening test for BCS, but IVC and hepatic vein catheterisation is essential for a complete work up of these patients.