 OBJECTIVE: CT pulmonary angiography is now often the first-line investigation for pulmonary emboli. When these studies are performed after hours in teaching hospitals, they are often initially interpreted by trainees. It is of great significance whether the interpretations of trainees and certified radiologists with regard to the presence of pulmonary emboli on CT pulmonary angiograms correspond, because of the morbidity and mortality of both the condition and its treatment. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Twenty-five consecutive CT pulmonary angiograms (CTPAs) of hospitalized patients were viewed at lung and soft tissue windows both on a workstation and on hard copies, at the observers' discretion. Each CTPA was divided into 28 arterial zones based on pulmonary anatomy (including the subsegmental arteries), giving a total of 700 arterial zones, and analyzed retrospectively and independently by two cross-sectional imaging specialists and four residents. Each arterial segment was rated with regard to pulmonary embolus as either high, intermediate, or low probability or not visualized. The kappa (Kappa) test, which tests for interobserver agreement, was used for statistical analysis. RESULTS: At the time of the scan all patients were hospitalized for underlying conditions. Of the 25 patients studied, 9 were referred from the ICU, 7 experienced severe acute shortness of breath and respiratory failure, 5 were post-partum women, 2 had had a recent stroke, 1 patient had antithrombin III deficiency, and 1 had a diagnosis of breast cancer. The incidence of pulmonary emboli was 44%. For the main pulmonary arteries interobserver agreement was good (Kappa=0.61) and for the segmental pulmonary arteries it was fair (Kappa=0.26). For the subsegmental arteries interobserver agreement was poor (Kappa=0.16). The zones where interobserver agreement was greatest (Kappa>0.4) were the left main, left lower lobe, and the right main pulmonary arteries. Interobserver agreement was poorest (Kappa<0.05) in the left interlobar, left lower lobe lateral basal segment, right lower lobe superior segment, and left lower lobe superior segment branches. None of the patients expired due to pulmonary emboli. CONCLUSION: Most life-threatening pulmonary emboli requiring urgent treatment are the more central emboli. This study demonstrates that trainees and certified radiologists can make similar conclusions regarding these central pulmonary emboli in hospitalized patients and that preliminary interpretations by trainees should not therefore adversely affect patient care.