Anticoagulation for the open heart surgery patient undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is achieved with the use of heparin. The industry standard of activated clotting time (ACT) was used to measure the effect of heparin. The commonly acceptable target time of anticoagulation adequacy is 480 seconds or greater. Some patients, however, exhibit resistance to standard dosing of heparin and do not reach target anticoagulation time (480 seconds). Antithrombin III deficiency has been previously cited as the cause of heparin resistance. Early detection of heparin resistance (HR) may avoid both the delayed start of CPB and inadequate anticoagulation, if emergency bypass is required. An anticoagulation sensitivity test (AST) was developed by adding 12 units of porcine mucosa heparin to the ACT tube (International Technidyne, celite type). Before anticoagulation, 4 mL of blood was drawn from the patient arterial line. Following the manufacturer's instructions, 2 mL of blood was added to each tube (ACT-baseline and ACT-AST). Three minutes after anticoagulation with 4 mg heparin/kg body weight, a second sample (ACT-CPB) was taken to determine anticoagulation adequacy. The ACT times of each sample were recorded for 300 procedures occurring during 2004 and were retrospectively reviewed. Heparin resistance occurred in approximately 20% of the patients (n = 61). In 54 patients, heparin resistance was predicted by the ACT-AST. This was determined by the presence of an ACT-AST time and an ACT-CPB that were both < 480 seconds. The positive predictive value was 90%, with a false positive rate of 3%. Heparin resistance occurs in patients undergoing CPB. We describe a simple and reliable test to avoid the delays of assessing anticoagulation for CPB (90% positive predictive value). Depending on program guidelines, patients can be given additional heparin or antithrombin III derivatives to aid in anticoagulation. An additional ACT must be performed and reach target times before CPB initiation. Testing of patient blood before the time of incision for sensitivity to heparin is a way to avoid a delay that can be critical in the care of the patient. Commercial tests are available, but efficacy data are limited, and they lead to added inventory expense. This method of titrating a diluted heparin additive, mixed with patient blood in a familiar ACT test, has proven to be an inexpensive and reliable test to predict patient's sensitivity to heparin.