Fibrinolysis and coagulation were studied in 10 neonates undergoing cardiac operations for congenital heart defects. Coagulation was activated during cardiopulmonary bypass as evidenced by highly increased prothrombin fragment 1 + 2 levels compared with preoperative values. Prothrombin fragment 1 + 2 levels remained elevated until postoperative day 3. Unlike coagulation, fibrinolysis was not activated during cardiopulmonary bypass but did show late activation on postoperative day 3, as evidenced by elevated levels of the fibrin degradation product D-dimer. Lack of fibrinolytic activation during bypass and its appearance on postoperative day 3 were partly explained by changes observed in tissue plasminogen activator and its inhibitor. During bypass, levels of tissue plasminogen activator and its inhibitor increased by 3.4-fold and 3.2-fold, respectively. In the postoperative period, levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor normalized rapidly whereas tissue plasminogen activator remained elevated, resulting in late fibrinolytic activation on postoperative day 3. In accordance with elevated prothrombin fragment 1 + 2, platelet count, antithrombin III, protein C, prothrombin, and factor VII were decreased on postoperative day 2, indicating ongoing consumptive coagulopathy. Nine patients had antithrombin III and six had protein C levels below age-specific normal ranges, consistent with an acquired deficiency state. Three had central venous thrombosis by postoperative day 4 or 5. In all three, thrombosis was preceded by antithrombin III deficiency, protein C deficiency, and highly elevated plasminogen activator inhibitor (3.7 to 37 times the mean of the other patients) on postoperative days 1 to 3. In conclusion, cardiopulmonary bypass in neonates caused rapid and profound alterations in the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems and initiated consumptive coagulopathy lasting until at least postoperative day 3. Thrombophilic abnormalities in antithrombin III, protein C, and fibrinolysis were frequently found and were associated with serious thrombotic complications.