The Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome (WBS) is defined by a group of anomalies, including macrosomia, macroglossia, omphalocele, and ear creases. Several minor anomalies have also been reported in the syndrome, including posterior helical ear pits (PHEP). Two independent linkage studies of pedigrees with autosomal dominant inheritance have shown linkage of WBS to 11p15.5 markers. Further confirming the location of WBS to this location is the finding of 11p15.5 duplications and translocations, as well as uniparental disomy for a small area of 11p15.5. In this study, members of previously described families exhibiting autosomal dominant inheritance of the PHEP phenotype were genotyped for three markers in the 11p15.5 region. These three markers were in the insulin-like growth factor (IGF2), insulin (INS), and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) region. The data were examined by linkage analysis using the same genetic model used previously to demonstrate linkage of WBS to markers on chromosome 11p15.5: an autosomal dominant model with a penetrance of 0.90 and a gene frequency of 0.001. In one large pedigree, linkage analysis of the 11p15.5 markers excluded the PHEP phenotype from the IGF2, INS, and TH region. In the four other pedigrees examined, the marker loci were not sufficiently informative or the pedigrees did not provide sufficient power to exclude linkage from this region. The strongest evidence against linkage of the PHEP phenotype to 11p15.5 was evident by inspection of the segregation of the haplotypes of the markers in the pedigrees. In two informative pedigrees, relatives with the PHEP phenotype did not share the same haplotype of markers identical by descent. Our results show that the PHEP phenotype is not linked to chromosome 11p15.5 in the informative families tested. In the families examined, there are not enough individuals with WBS to determine if WBS was linked to 11p15.5 in these families. Although locus heterogeneity has not been demonstrated in WBS, it is possible that a second WBS locus exists and that the PHEP phenotype in these families is linked to a second WBS locus. Alternatively, the PHEP phenotype may occur independently of WBS so that the association of WBS and PHEP in our pedigrees may, in fact, represent causal heterogeneity.