 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma), an embryonal malignancy of the kidney, is the most common renal tumor of childhood. Wilms tumor usually presents as an abdominal mass in an otherwise apparently healthy child. Wilms tumor has the potential for both local and distant spread. Approximately 5%-10% of children with Wilms tumor have bilateral or multicentric tumors. The average age at presentation is 42-47 months for children with unilateral Wilms tumor and 30-33 months for those with bilateral Wilms tumor.  Current models of Wilms tumor development propose that a genetic mutation predisposes to nephrogenic rests (benign foci of embryonal kidney cells that persist abnormally into postnatal life). Nephrogenic rests are characterized as intralobar or perilobar. In general, intralobar rests (usually single lesions within the renal lobe, renal sinus, or calyceal walls) are associated with the WAGR (Wilms tumor-aniridia-genital anomalies-retardation) syndrome and Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS). In general, perilobar rests (usually multiple lesions in the periphery of the renal lobe) are associated with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and hemi-hypertrophy. However, the association between type of nephrogenic rest and predisposition syndrome is not absolute. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The workup of a child with suspected Wilms tumor begins with appropriate diagnostic imaging studies. Ultrasonography is the recommended first-line test because it provides a panoramic view of the abdomen. Computed tomography (CT) can also visualize pelvic and abdominal structures as well as lymph nodes. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may facilitate the distinction between Wilms tumor and nephrogenic rests. The definitive diagnosis of Wilms tumor can be made only by surgical resection or biopsy.  CAUSES: A germline mutation is thought to be the cause of about 10%-15% of Wilms tumor. WT1 germline mutations give rise to WAGR syndrome, DDS, Frasier syndrome, and isolated Wilms tumor (i.e., Wilms tumor with no evidence of an underlying syndrome). Epigenetic and genomic alterations of chromosome 11p15 give rise to BWS. Approximately 1%-2% of individuals with Wilms tumor have at least one relative also diagnosed with Wilms tumor; however, the underlying genetic mechanisms are usually not known. Linkage analysis has mapped Wilms tumor predisposition genes to 17q (locus name FWT1) and 19q (locus name FWT2). Because in some families the Wilms tumor phenotype does not show linkage to WT1, FWT1, or FWT2, the existence of one or more other genes in which mutations cause familial Wilms tumor is likely.  GENETIC COUNSELING: If a proband has syndromic Wilms tumor, genetic counseling for the specific syndrome is appropriate. Nonsyndromic Wilms tumor most frequently occurs as a simplex case (i.e., a single occurrence in a family). Empiric risks to the sibs of a proband who is a simplex case are unknown but likely low; empiric risks to the offspring of a proband who is a simplex case are not increased. Prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at 50% risk of inheriting a WT1 or 11p15 genomic alteration from a parent is possible when the mutation and/or genetic mechanism in the family is known. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Includes surgery, chemotherapy, and for some individuals, radiation therapy. Surgery, a cornerstone of treatment, is performed at the time of diagnosis or after 4-8 weeks of preoperative chemotherapy. Because Wilms tumor can spread to the lungs, preoperative chest radiography or chest CT scans are imperative. Nephron-sparing surgery is routinely advocated for those with bilateral Wilms tumor. Chemotherapy includes vincristine and dactinomycin for stage I and II favorable histology Wilms tumor and vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin for stage III or IV favorable histology disease. Treatment for anaplastic Wilms tumor includes vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide, etoposide, and carboplatin. After surgery children with advanced disease (stage III or IV) undergo radiation therapy. End-stage renal disease (ESRD) is treated initially with dialysis, followed by renal transplantation when possible.  Surveillance: (1) For children with BWS or isolated hemihypertrophy: abdominal ultrasound examination every three months until age eight years. (2) For children with WAGR syndrome, sibs of an individual with familial Wilms tumor, and offspring of survivors of bilateral Wilms tumor: regular screening by abdominal ultrasound examination until age five to seven years. (3) For those who have completed therapy for Wilms tumor: renal ultrasound examination every three months for metachronous tumors until age seven years. (4) For ESRD: in individuals with WAGR syndrome, DDS, and GU anomalies: at least annual urinalysis, blood pressure measurement, and serum chemistries (including BUN and creatinine). 