The superficial angiomas and nevi arise from the endothelial cells, the pigment-cell-system or the epidermal cells. Hemangiomas are benign tumours of the endothelial cells appearing predominantly in female newborn infants. Depending on localisation, growth and proliferation there is a tendency for spontaneous involution. For irreversible dysfunction or anatomical deformities surgical resection during the growth phase of the hemangioma is indicated. Surgery may be necessary to improve the functional and esthetic appearance after spontaneous involution causing loose residual skin. Radiotherapy of the lesion is rarely indicated. Systemic steroid therapy in cooperation with the pediatrician should be reserved only for desperate cases such as Kasabach-Merrit-Syndrome. Port wine nevi without scars can be covered with skin tanning cosmetics. Argon-Laser-Therapy is not yet so selective that healing can be achieved with certainty and without scars. Clinical progression requires surgery, especially for racemose angiectasia. Arterial embolization should only be used under special conditions, and then only as pretreatment. Lymphangiomas are mostly angiectatic processes, especially of lymphatic vascular tissue and vessels. Even large cystic lymphangiomas can be treated quite well by surgery, but operations on large diffuse invasive lymphangiomas often cause lymphedema and infection similar to erysipelas leading to pseudorecurrence. The benign malformations of the pigment cell system require clear differentiation from malignant melanoma and its precursors. Malignant melanoma develops more frequently from congenital nevi of the deep type than from other pigmented lesions. Malignant melanomas arising from giant nevi are usually diagnosed too late so that almost all patients die. Removal of giant nevi as early as possible is recommended. The epidermal malformations, too, need accurate diagnosis. Multisymptomatic syndromes such as the Basal-Cell-Nevus-Syndrome, and vascular and pigment cell abnormalities require special care.