BACKGROUND: Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication and the Rossetti modification represent two different surgical approaches to resolving gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Concerns have arisen that the Rossetti modification results in increased postoperative dysphagia. In this study, we compared a group of patients who underwent a laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication with a group who had undergone the Rossetti modification to determine if there was a significant difference in postoperative dysphagia. Additionally, we wanted to confirm that the Nissen procedure performed laparoscopically could resolve GERD as successfully as the Rossetti modification, with no difference in operative complications. METHODS: We prospectively collected data on 101 patients who underwent laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication and compared outcomes with those of 138 patients who had undergone the laparoscopic Rossetti modification in a previous series. RESULTS: All patients experienced resolution of reflux symptoms. No statistically significant differences were found between the groups in terms of intraoperative or postoperative complications, conversions to open procedure, or length of hospitalization. Paradoxically, there was a significant difference in operating time between the Rossetti and the Nissen groups (70.6 min vs 45.6 min, p = 0.006). Postoperative dysphagia requiring dilation was significantly higher in the Rossetti group (21.7% vs 8.9%, p = 0.008). However, there was a significantly higher percentage of patients in the Rossetti group who had had esophagitis preoperatively (95.7% vs 86.1%, p = 0.009), although the proportion of patients having Barrett's esophagus was higher in the Nissen group (9.4% vs 24.8%, p = 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Both approaches resolved reflux symptoms without significant differences in complications, conversions, or length of stay. Preoperative differences between groups, as well as the method of sequentially comparing the two different procedures, prevent us from attributing greater postoperative dysphagia in the Rossetti group solely to the choice of surgical approach. Prospective randomized studies are needed to control for variables, such as surgical team experience and patient differences.