BACKGROUND: The incidence of adenocarcinoma of the gastric cardia has increased recently in the West. However, in Japan, most patients with gastric carcinoma have disease that is situated in the body and the distal stomach. The objectives of this study were to compare the clinicopathologic findings of patients with early gastric carcinoma (EGC) arising at the cardia and those with carcinoma in more distal parts of the stomach, then comparing the findings with those from patients with carcinoma of the gastric cardia in the West. METHODS: Three thousand one hundred forty-four patients with EGC who underwent surgical resection between 1962 and 1997 at the National Cancer Center Hospital in Tokyo were studied. Seventy patients with EGC at the cardia were compared with those who had lesions in the middle and lower parts of the stomach. The body mass index (BMI), smoking, and drinking were evaluated using all patients with cardia EGC and 344 patients in a matched cohort in the latter group. RESULTS: Seventy patients had an EGC located just at the cardia, whereas 2796 patients had lesions in the lower two-thirds of the stomach. The former lesions were different from those in the distal two-thirds of the stomach: More often, they were of an elevated type (34% vs. 14%, respectively, they were histologically well differentiated in 89% (vs. 59%), and there were more submucosal tumors (53% vs. 41%). The BMI, smoking, and drinking in the two groups were not different. The incidence of Barrett esophagus and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) in patients with EGC were 2. 9% (2 of 70 patients) and 5.7% (4 of 70 patients), respectively. CONCLUSIONS: There were many significant differences in clinicopathologic characteristics between patients with carcinoma of the cardia and patients with carcinoma of the distal stomach in Japan. The incidence of early cardia carcinoma was very low in Japan, and obesity, smoking, drinking, Barrett esophagus, or GERD were not related to its occurrence, in contrast to reports in the West.