N-(2-Hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide (HPMA)-lectin (wheat germ agglutinin (WGA), peanut agglutinin (PNA)) drug conjugates for treatment of the pre-cancerous conditions ulcerative colitis and Barrett's esophagus are being developed. Cell-surface glycoproteins that are altered in disease and development bind lectins. PNA binds alpha-lactose and the Thomsen-Friedenreich (TF) antigen, a disease- and development-associated glycoprotein. PNA incorporation in conjugates may allow for preferential delivery to diseased over healthy tissues. Conjugates were prepared by attaching lectins to HPMA copolymers via an amide linkage. Frontal affinity chromatography was used to measure dissociation constants (K(d)) of free and conjugated lectins. Animal models of colitis (DSS, TNBS/EtOH) were developed. Human biopsy specimens were obtained. Free and HPMA copolymer-conjugated FITC-labeled lectin and anti-TF antigen antibody binding patterns were examined in normal neonatal, adult and diseased rodent tissues and normal and diseased human tissues. K(d) values of free and conjugated lectins were similar ( approximately 10(-5) M(-1)). Free and conjugated lectins had comparable binding patterns. In health, strong WGA binding was seen in goblet cells; PNA binding was minimal, occurring only in the supranuclear goblet cell region. In disease, WGA binding was not altered, but PNA binding was increased in both human and rodent tissues; entire goblets bound the lectin. Anti-TF antigen antibody binding was minimal, but did overlap with PNA binding patterns both in normal and diseased tissues. Conjugation of lectins to HPMA copolymers does not affect binding affinity. Alterations in glycoprotein structures in development and disease resulted in modified lectin binding patterns. In development and disease, the PNA binding seen was to the TF antigen and other lactose-containing glycoproteins. The results suggest that site-specific delivery of therapeutic agents such as cyclosporin A (CsA) for ulcerative colitis and mesochlorin e(6) for Barrett's esophagus may be achieved. P(HPMA)-lectin-CsA conjugates have been prepared and preliminary in vivo studies are underway.