The effect of fractionating the 633 nm illumination of 5-aminolaevulinic (ALA)-based photodynamic therapy (PDT) of the normal rat oesophagus was studied. Fractionation of the illumination could enhance the PDT effect in two ways: (a) delay of the vascular shutdown or relaxation of the vasoconstriction induced by ALA-PDT and (b) use of newly formed protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), produced during the dark interval. Forty rats were randomly allocated to two groups of 20 animals each. To study vascular effects, in group 1 illumination with 633 nm (100 mW/cm) was performed at 3 h after oral ALA administration (200 mg/kg) either continuously with 20 J/cm diffuser length (n = 5) or fractionated 2 x 10 J/cm with a 150 s interval (n = 5), five animals served as controls. Blood flow was measured with a laser Doppler flowmeter. To study the effect of renewed PpIX forming, animals in group 2 were illuminated continuously at 3 h after ALA with 20 J/cm (n = 5) or 40 J/cm (n = 5) or fractionated 2 x 20 J/cm with a 3 h interval (n = 5), five animals served as controls. In all animals the in vivo fluence rate and PpIX fluorescence were measured during illuminations and animals were killed at 48 h after PDT. ALA-PDT did not cause any significant vasoconstriction. Fluorescence measurements and dosimetric results in group 1 did not differ between animals illuminated continuously or fractionated with a 150 s interval. In group 2, during a 3 h dark interval, PpIX fluorescence increased and was bleached during the second illumination. The tissue optical properties changed during the 3 h dark interval, resulting in a lower in vivo fluence rate (p < or = 0.001). Fractionation did not result in more oesophageal damage. It was concluded that a 150 s interval during illumination in ALA-PDT does not increase oesophageal blood flow. During an interval of 3 h new PpIX is formed. In the present study, fractionated illumination using short or long time intervals did not result in more damage. Thus, this study shows no evidence for improved PDT effect with fractionated light delivery.