BACKGROUND: Surgical therapy of early malignancies of the upper gastrointestinal tract is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality, especially in elderly and co-morbid patients. In Japan endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) has been proven to be safe and efficacious in this indication. PATIENTS AND METHODS: 22 patients (68 +/- 14 years, 9 females) with high-grade dysplasia of the esophagus (n = 5), early carcinoma of the esophagus (T1N0M0, n = 11) or early gastric cancer (T1N0M0, n = 6) proven by high-resolution videoendoscopy (plus chromoendoscopy in most cases), miniprobe-endosonography (12-20 MHz) and biopsy were enrolled. The lesion size ranged from 7-40 mm in diameter. EMR was performed using a monofile snare, in almost all cases after submucosal injection of an attenuated epinephrine-solution (1:20,000) to effect a lifting sign. "En bloc" resection was possible in 17/22 cases (77 %), but in 5 patients piecemeal-resection had to be performed due to a larger lesion size. RESULTS: Active bleeding occurred on 14 of 22 occasions (64 %), in another 5 patients secondary bleeding (within 24 h after EMR) were detected. All these events could be managed endoscopically (mainly by hemoclip application) and blood transfusion was not required. Other complications did not occur. A complete resection (R0) was achieved in 21/22 cases, however, one patient had to undergo a second EMR procedure because histology of the first resected specimen had revealed malignant infiltration of the resection margin (R1). After the second EMR procedure complete (R0)-resection was obtained. Compared to the histological findings after EMR the pre-procedural staging proved to be correct in all cases. The control examinations (clinical exam, lab data, endoscopy with multiple biopsies, endosonography and CT) after EMR revealed no local or systemic cancer recurrence in 21/22 patients (median follow-up 5 months, range 3-12 months). However, in one patient with adenocarcinoma and Barrett-esophagus another mucosal adenocarcinoma was detected 3 months after EMR (located in opposite to the initial carcinoma treated with EMR). CONCLUSION: EMR seems to be a safe and effective (regarding local tumor control) therapy for high-grade dyplasia and early malignancies in the upper gastrointestinal tract. However, long-term follow-up in these patients has to be awaited.