AIM: To assess the oesophageal manometric characteristics and 24-h pH profiles of patients with both short-segment and long-segment Barrett's oesophagus and compare them with those of patients with reflux oesophagitis and controls. METHODS: Seventy-nine patients who had undergone upper digestive endoscopy were recruited: 16 had short-segment Barrett's oesophagus, 13 had long-segment Barrett's oesophagus, 25 had grade III oesophagitis according to the Savary-Miller classification and 25 were used as controls. The diagnosis of Barrett's oesophagus was based on the histological detection of specialized intestinal metaplasia, which extended < 3 cm into the oesophagus in patients with short-segment disease and > 3 cm in patients with long-segment disease. All subjects underwent oesophageal manometry and basal 24-h oesophageal pH monitoring. RESULTS: The lower oesophageal sphincter pressure was significantly lower in patients with reflux oesophagitis and short-segment and long-segment Barrett's oesophagus than in controls (P=0.0004-0.0001), but there was no difference among the three reflux groups. The peristaltic wave amplitude of patients with long-segment Barrett's oesophagus was significantly lower than that of controls (P=0.002) and patients with short-segment Barrett's oesophagus (P=0.02), but was no different from that of patients with reflux oesophagitis. The percentage of non-propagated wet swallows was significantly higher in patients with reflux oesophagitis and short-segment and long-segment Barrett's oesophagus when compared with that of controls (P=0.0004-0.0001). The total percentage of time the oesophagus was exposed to pH < 4.0 was significantly higher in patients with reflux oesophagitis and short-segment and long-segment Barrett's oesophagus (P=0.0001) than in controls, and was higher in patients with long-segment disease than in those with short-segment disease (P=0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Long-segment Barrett's oesophagus is characterized by a greater impairment of peristaltic wave amplitude and a higher oesophageal acid exposure than is short-segment Barrett's oesophagus. However, both forms are linked to increased acid reflux.