An intestinal-type epithelium is often present at columnar-lined esophagus, gastroesophageal junction or within the so-called short segment Barrett's esophagus, but ultrastructural study failed to detect enterocytes in columnar-lined esophagus. The authors have analyzed the intestinal aspects present in areas of columnar-lined esophagus in a population of patients with reflux esophagitis to better understand the morphology and histogenesis of the proliferating elements. Columnar-lined mucosa was studied in 35 patients. Columnarsurface cells displayed a wide spectrum of ultrastructural features. Well-differentiated columnar secretory cells, secretory-absorptive cells, poorly differentiated columnar cells, atypical columnar cells, and goblet cells were detected. Well-differentiated absorptive cells were never found, These results demonstrate that the areas of intestinal metaplasia show a wide spectrum of ultrastructural phenotypes, ranging from poorly to well-differentiated cells. However, true enterocytes were not found and the most represented phenotype is that of secretory-absorptive cells, whose principal characteristic is the presence of secretory and absorptive aspects together. They can be described as secretory enterocytes or cells with double specialization. To the authors' knowledge, similar cells were not previously described in normal intestinal mucosa, and ultrastructural studies are consistent in describing a broad spectrum of ultrastructural features, suggesting that Barrett's specialized metaplasia is derived from cells with the capacity for a wide range of differentiation. Therefore, despite the wide use of term intestinal metaplasia in the medical literature, experimental data clearly failed to detect enterocytes in the columnar-lined esophagus, and ultrastructural data do not support the concept of intestinal metaplasia. The cellular heterogeneity seems to be the result of a "phenotypic shift" of undifferentiated elements, which show a different pattern of evolution. The result of this process is the formation of new cell types dissimilar from those normally present in esophageal, gastric, or duodenal mucosa.