The usual surgical treatment for patients with Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a classic Nissen fundoplication or posterior gastropexy with cardial calibration. However, some surgical reports as well as our experience suggest that the rate of failure of the Nissen fundoplication or Hill's posterior gastropexy in patients with BE is significantly higher than in those with reflux esophagitis without BE, probably due in part to the persistence of duodenal reflux into the esophagus. Our aim was to determine the late subjective and objective results of an operation consisting in "acid suppression" (vagotomy-partial gastrectomy) and "duodenal diversion" (Roux-en-Y anastomosis) as a primary surgical procedure for patients with BE. Altogether, 210 patients were subjected to this technique. It consisted in a primary operation in 142 patients and revision surgery in 68. They underwent complete clinical, radiologic, endoscopic, histologic, and manometric studies. In some cases 24-hour pH studies, Bilitec studies, gastric emptying, and gastric acid secretion evaluations were performed. There were two deaths (0.95%), and postoperative morbidity was low (5.3%). The late mean follow-up (58 months) for 146 patients who completed a follow-up longer than 24 months showed Visick I and II grades in 91.1% of the cases. In 14.9% of the cases 24-hour pH monitoring showed excessive acid reflux 1 year after surgery. No dysplasia or adenocarcinoma has appeared up to now. Functional studies showed significant alleviation of lower esophageal sphincter (LES) incompetence, with abolition of duodenal reflux into the esophagus. Gastric emptying of solids was normal, and basal and peak gastric acid output remained at a low level 8 to 10 years after surgery. In patients with BE, with severe damage of the LES and esophageal peristalsis, the "suppression diversion" operation completely abolishes the reflux of injurious components of the refluxate and improves sphincter competence. This effect is permanent and avoids the appearance of dysplasia or adenocarcinoma.