 BACKGROUND/AIMS: We aimed to investigate the prevalence of intestinal metaplasia in the cardia of a patient group with high incidence of Helicobacter pylori infection presenting for elective upper endoscopy. We also re-evaluated the relation between intestinal metaplasia in the cardia and gastroesophageal reflux disease, smoking, alcohol history, H. pylori infection, Barrett's esophagus and intestinal metaplasia elsewhere in the stomach. METHODOLOGY: Sixty patients presenting for elective upper endoscopy were included in this study. Prior to undergoing endoscopy each patient was questioned with regard to the clinical indication and symptoms including heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia. In addition, a smoking and alcohol history were recorded. Endoscopic biopsies: 1) one from the midantrum on the lesser curvature, 2) one from the incisura angularis, 3) one from the mid-corpus on the lesser curvature, 4) one from the columnar side of the squamocolumnar junction, 5) one from the squamous side of the squamocolumnar junction, 6) one from 2 cm distal to the esophagogastric junction, 7) one from across the squamocolumnar junction. Slides were stained using a combination of hematoxylin-eosin with Alcian blue at pH 2.5 for intestinal metaplasia. Each specimen was examined for the presence of H. pylori. RESULTS: The prevalence of H. pylori infection was 63%. Prevalence of the H. pylori infection was significantly lower in the patients with intestinal metaplasia of the cardia than in the patients without intestinal metaplasia of the cardia (P = 0.025). There was a positive correlation between the age of the patients and having intestinal metaplasia of the cardia (r = 0.286, P = 0.008). There was no relationship between intestinal metaplasia of the cardia and pyrozis, regurgitation, dysphagia, history of alcohol and smoking esophagitis determined by endoscopy or histopathology, sex, intestinal metaplasia elsewhere in the stomach (P > 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of the intestinal metaplasia of the gastric cardia in Turkey is less than that of western countries. Intestinal metaplasia of the gastric cardia negatively correlates with H. pylori infection. And there was no relationship between gastric cardia intestinal metaplasia and reflux disease. Further investigations are needed for determining the premalign lesion and etiologic factors for cancer of the gastric cardia.