BACKGROUND: Efforts to ablate Barrett's epithelium have met with mixed results. We report the long-term follow-up evaluation of the preliminary cohort of patients who underwent thermal ablation of Barrett's epithelium with the potassium-titanyl-phosphate (KTP) laser after anti-reflux surgery. METHODS: Nine patients with intestinal metaplasia (IM) of the esophagus underwent fundoplication (7 laparoscopic Nissen, 1 laparoscopic Toupet, 1 open Nissen) between May 1993 and October 1994. Three patients had an IM less than 3 cm long (33%). One year after the operation, all the patients were symptom free, had discontinued medications, and had a normal 24-h pH study. From June 1995 to February 1996, these patients underwent a median of two (range, 1-5) endoscopic procedures with directed mucosal ablation using the KTP laser. A comparative cohort of 21 patients (IM length, <3cm; 38%) treated during the same period with fundoplication alone served as a control. The patients were followed prospectively with annual or biennial endoscopy and biopsy. All the patients were contacted by mail, telephone, or clinic visit annually to determine symptomatic and quality-of-life outcome of antireflux surgery. RESULTS: The mean follow-up period was 6.8 years (range, 6-7.5 years). At this writing, the study patients are alive and well. Eight of the patients have experienced histologic loss of IM (89%) according to their last biopsy result. One patient has had regression of low-grade dysplasia to IM. The patients treated with fundoplication alone had a mean follow-up period of 5.6 years (range, 4.7-7.2 years). On the basis of the last biopsy result, 7 of 21 patients (33%) had no evidence of IM. CONCLUSIONS: A program of tailored antireflux surgery followed by thermal mucosal ablation causes a loss of IM in a majority of patients with Barrett's esophagus. This may represent a significant improvement in histologic outcome over that of treatment with fundoplication alone (p = 0.007 Fisher's exact test).