 INTRODUCTION: Barrett's epithelium (BE) has malignant potential. Neither acid suppression nor antireflux surgery produce consistent or complete regression of the metaplastic epithelium. Endoscopic thermoablation with argon plasma coagulation (APC) offers a different approach but factors influencing its outcome have not been systematically examined. AIM: To assess the efficacy of APC and factors influencing initial and one year outcome. METHODS: Fifty patients, mean age 61.4 years, mean BE length 5.9 cm (range 3-19), underwent APC therapy at four weekly intervals while receiving proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy. BE margins were marked by India ink tattooing and extent was documented by grid drawings, photography, and 2 cm interval quadrantic jumbo biopsies. Twenty four hour ambulatory oesophageal pH studies were done while on PPIs before and after APC therapy, and Bilitec bilirubin monitoring after APC completion. RESULTS: A total of 68% of patients achieved >90% BE ablation after a median of four APC sessions. Persistent BE (>10% original BE area) was associated with longer initial BE length despite more APC sessions. Persistent acid and bile reflux on PPIs, although commoner in this group, were not significantly different from those successfully ablated. Fifteen of 34 patients (44%) with successful macroscopic clearance had buried glands, present in 8.3% of a total of 338 biopsies. At the one year follow up, only 32% of those with initial successful ablation showed no recurrence. BE recurred or increased in most with mean segment length increases of 1.1 cm and 1.6 cm, respectively, in patients with previous full ablation and those with persistent BE. The presence of buried glands did not predict BE recurrence. Patients who reduced their PPI dose had significantly greater BE recurrence. CONCLUSIONS: APC is most effective for shorter segment BE ablation but "buried" glands do occur. Recurrence of BE is common at one year, especially in those with initial persistent and/or long segment BE and those who reduce their PPI dose.