 BACKGROUND: Unsedated esophagoscopy with small-diameter endoscopes is generally well tolerated but of limited sensitivity for the diagnosis of esophageal mucosal disease. This study evaluated the sensitivity of esophagoscopy performed with new 4-mm diameter prototype battery-powered and video endoscopes. Patient tolerance for an unsedated examination with the 4-mm endoscopes was assessed and the performance characteristics of the battery-powered and video 4-mm endoscopes were compared. METHODS: Patients referred for EGD were recruited to undergo an additional examination with a 4-mm endoscope. A prototype 60-cm long, 4-mm diameter battery-powered fiberoptic esophagoscope was used in the first 24 patients and a prototype 60-cm long, 4-mm diameter video esophagoscope in the next 27 patients. Examiners who were unaware of patient history and procedure indications recorded esophageal findings, ease of intubation, optical quality (5-point visual scale), and time for examination of the esophagus and then recorded esophageal findings after the standard EGD. RESULTS: The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for identification of Barrett's esophagus was 100%; overall sensitivity, accuracy, and specificity for detecting esophageal lesions were, respectively, 91%, 98%, and 99%. Patient tolerance (assessed by symptom scores for choking, pain, and discomfort) and acceptability of unsedated esophagoscopy with the 4-mm diameter instruments were significantly better than in a historical group of patients examined with a 3-mm diameter endoscope. The optical quality of video endoscope was rated as superior to that of battery-powered endoscope, and esophageal examination was performed significantly quicker with the video versus the battery-powered endoscope (68 vs. 137 seconds; p = 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Unsedated esophagoscopy with 4-mm diameter endoscopes may be an alternative to EGD for screening for Barrett's esophagus. Given the current state of endoscopic technology, a minimum diameter of 4 mm is required for satisfactory esophageal imaging.