BACKGROUND: Several findings suggest that gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) has a significant impact on patients' quality of life. The aim of this prospective study was (a) to evaluate and compare quality-of-life data before and after laparoscopic antireflux surgery (LARS) in GERD patients with and without Barrett's esophagus (BE); and (b) to compare quality-of-life data of these patients to normative data for a comparable general population. METHODS: The Gastrointestinal Quality of Life Index (GIQLI) was administrated to 75 BE patients and to 174 patients with GERD without BE (Savary-Miller classification: grade 1: n = 49; grade 2: n = 69; grade 3: n = 56). The questionnaire was given to all patients preoperatively, 3months, 1 year, and 3 years after laparoscopic "floppy" Nissen fundoplication. RESULTS: Before surgery, BE patients (mean: 96.8 +/- 9.3 points) had a better but not significant (p<0.06) general score of the GIQLI when compared with patients without BE (mean: 86.4 +/- 10.1 points). This difference is solely based on the subdimension "gastrointestinal symptoms" which means that GERD symptoms are less intensively and frequently recognized in BE patients than in patients without BE. There are no other differences in the other four subdimensions of the GIQLI between both groups. Three months, 1 year, and 3 years after LARS, GIQLI was significantly (p<0.01) improved in both groups (BE patients mean after 3 years: 121.9 +/- 8.2 points; non-BE patients mean after 3 years: 122.8 +/- 9.3 points). This improvement was significantly better (p<0.05) in patients without BE than in BE patients. Before surgery, both groups scored significantly below average on all subscores of GIQLI compared to general population (mean: 122.6 +/- 8.5 points). After surgery, there are no differences detectable. CONCLUSION: As our data show, non-BE patients undergoing LARS achieve a better quality-of-life improvement than those patients with BE. However, after surgery GIQLI of both groups is comparable to the mean value of general population. This means that LARS is able to improve quality of life significantly in all GERD patients, with and without BE.