We investigated TP53 mutation patterns in cancers of the esophagus and cardia of patients coming from Lower Normandy, a region situated in the highest incidence area in Europe. To screen tumor samples, we first used denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), a well-characterized technique which constituted our reference method. Then the results were compared with those obtained by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC), a recent and automatic screening technology. Analysis of the TP53 mutations profile showed that the detected alterations were mainly point mutations. Ninety-seven percent (33/34) of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma samples presented at least one mutation or polymorphism. The proportion of somatic, non-silent and sequence-confirmed mutations was 76% (26/34). The most common substitutions were G-->A transitions, which could be related to nitrosamines, acetaldehyde or factors prone to producing mucosal irritation, like hot beverages. G-->T transversions, which were also frequently detected, could originate from benzo[a]pyrene in tobacco smoke. A-->T transversions were not revealed in our series, which constitutes a discordance with mutational spectra already performed in north-western France. Concerning adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and cardia, the alteration frequency was 69% (11/16), with a majority of G-->A transitions at CpG dinucleotides. They are probably related to endogenous process mediated by inflammatory diseases like gastro-esophageal reflux and Barrett's esophagus. The main advantage provided by DHPLC was its ease of application. However, the optimization steps turned out to be quite critical, especially for sequences with high melting temperatures embedded in lower melting temperature fragments. Considering only the common sequences analyzed by the two techniques, four of the 46 positive samples detected by DGGE were not revealed by DHPLC. This result stresses the limited sensitivity of DHPLC compared with DGGE under the conditions described in this study.