Barrett's epithelium (BE), the esophageal columnar-lining with intestinal differentiation, is a premalignant condition predisposing to adenocarcinoma. Columnar cells are the prevalent element of BE, but the hallmark of intestinal differentiation is the goblet population that defines the specialised columnar epithelium (SCE). We have demonstrated that columnar cells adjacent to Barrett's adenocarcinoma (BA) exhibit enterocytic features in areas with and without SCE. Nevertheless, the relationship between malignancy and the presence of these elements is not established. To investigate whether intestinal differentiated cells, other than goblet cells, are associated to neoplasia we compared the prevalence of enterocytic features in columnar elements with and without associated BA through the use of sucrase-isomaltase (SI) immunoreactivity in 31 columnar esophageal segments (CLES) and 12 BA. In metaplasia, SI was only expressed at the columnar cells. Apical staining was exclusive of CLES with SCE. SI was present at the cytoplasm in 22.2% of CLES without SCE. Apical SI occurred in BE with and without carcinoma, similarly in areas with and without SCE (p = 0.11 and p = 0.50, respectively). In areas with SCE, columnar cells with apical SI were more frequent in cases of BE adjacent to carcinoma than in cases without neoplasia but the difference did not reach significance (p = 0.053). In areas without SCE, apical SI was significantly (p = 0.01) more frequent in cases with carcinoma. Apical SI was equally found in neoplastic as in metaplastic areas, with and without SCE, (p = 0.07 and p = 0.40, respectively). In conclusion this study on the frequency of SI on CLES with and without neoplasia demonstrated that additionally to SCE, metaplastic enterocytic cells are also associated with malignancy. It also confirmed that the presence of intestinal features are underestimated if only goblet elements are used for its identification, reinforcing the utility of the immunohistochemical recognition of enterocytic characteristics for establishing the diagnosis of BE.