 INTRODUCTION: Barrett's esophagus, a syndrome in which the squamous mucosa that normally lines the distal esophagus is replaced with columnar epithelium, is found in a small percentage of patients presenting with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). The columnar epithelium may be protective, guarding people afflicted with Barrett's esophagus from experiencing symptoms related to acid reflux. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether people with Barrett's esophagus subjectively experience fewer symptoms or symptoms of decreased severity, despite sustaining greater acid exposure, than those with GERD but without Barrett's syndrome. METHODS: We conducted a chart review of patients with GERD. Criteria for inclusion in the study were esophagogastroscopy, motility testing and a 24-hour pH study. Fifty-eight patients (29 men, 29 women) fulfilled these criteria. The diagnosis of GERD was based on an abnormal 24-hour pH study (DeMeester score). Of these 58 patients, 21 (14 men, 7 women) were found to have histologically confirmed Barrett's esophagus. A questionnaire to assess the key symptoms of GERD was administered, with a severity score ranging from 0 to 3 (3 being the most severe) for each symptom. RESULTS: Patients with Barrett's esophagus experienced symptoms significantly less severe (p < 0.01) than those with GERD. Patients with Barrett's esophagus also had a greater degree of acid exposure as identified by higher DeMeester scores (p = 0.056), longer episodes of acid exposure, a greater number of long episodes (> 5 min) of acid exposure (p = 0.033) and an increased percentage of time when their pH was less than 4. Patients with Barrett's esophagus had decreased resting lower esophageal sphincter tone, and number and amplitude of peristaltic contractions. CONCLUSIONS: For patients with Barrett's esophagus, the columnar epithelium may serve a protective function in guarding against symptoms of acid reflux. This has implications for the diagnosis and management of this condition.