BACKGROUND: The length of Barrett's oesophagus seems to correlate well with indicators of severe gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. However, it remains unknown whether prior acid suppressive therapy affects the length of newly diagnosed Barrett's oesophagus. METHODS: A retrospective analysis of a well-characterized large cohort of patients with Barrett's oesophagus diagnosed between 1981 and 2000. AIM: To compare the length of Barrett's oesophagus between patients who received acid suppressive therapy prior to their diagnosis to those who did not receive such therapy. Pharmacy records were obtained from Department of the Veterans Affairs computerized records and prospectively collected research records. We further examined the association between prior use of acid suppressive therapy and the length of Barrett's oesophagus in correlation analyses, as well as multivariate linear regression analyses while adjusting for differences in year of diagnosis, age, gender, ethnicity, and the presence of intestinal metaplasia of the gastric cardia. Results : There were 340 patients with Barrett's oesophagus first diagnosed between 1981 and 2000. The average length of Barrett's oesophagus at the time of first diagnosis was 4.4 cm (range: 0.5-16). Of all patients, 139 (41%) had prior use of histamine-2 receptor antagonists, or proton-pump inhibitors (41 used both), and 201 (59%) used neither prior to the diagnosis of Barrett's oesophagus. The mean length of Barrett's oesophagus was significantly shorter in patients with prior use of proton-pump inhibitors (3.4 cm) or proton-pump inhibitors and histamine-2 receptor antagonists (3.1 cm) when compared to those with none of these medications (4.8 cm). In the multivariate linear regression model, the prior use of proton-pump inhibitors or either proton-pump inhibitors or histamine-2 receptor antagonists was an independent predictor of shorter length of Barrett's oesophagus (P = 0.0396). CONCLUSIONS: The use of acid suppressive therapy among patients is associated with a reduction in the eventual length of newly diagnosed Barrett's oesophagus with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. This finding is independent of the year of diagnosis or demographic features of patients. Further studies are required to confirm this finding.