 BACKGROUND: After esophagectomy for cancer, the first choice for reconstruction of the gastrointestinal continuity is by gastric tube. When this is not feasible, a reconstruction by colon interposition can be performed. The aim of this study was to assess the quality of life in patients at least 6 months after esophageal cancer resection and colon interposition without signs of recurrent disease. The results were compared with previously published data of patients after esophageal cancer resection and gastric tube reconstruction. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between January 1993 and January 2002, 36 patients underwent esophageal cancer resection and gastrointestinal reconstruction by colon interposition. A one-time Quality of Life assessment was carried out in 14 patients who were still disease free after a median follow-up of 21 months (mean 35, range 7-97). The patients were visited at home and asked to fill in questionnaires which consisted of the Short Form-36 (SF-36) Health Survey to assess general quality of life, an adapted Rotterdam Symptom Checklist to assess disease-specific quality of life, a visual analogue scale, and an additional questionnaire concerning other specific effects of the operation. RESULTS: All 14 patients returned the completed set of questionnaires. Compared to the previously published results of patients after gastric tube reconstruction patients with a colon interposition scored significantly (P < or = 0.05) lower in five of the eight subscales of the SF-36 questionnaire (i.e. general health, physical role, vitality, social functioning, and mental health). The most frequent symptoms measured by the Rotterdam Symptom Checklist were early satiety after a meal, dysphagia, diarrhea, loss of sexual interest, and fatigue. Six patients could not independently run their housekeeping and four patients still needed artificial enteral nutrition. CONCLUSION: Based on the SF-36 questionnaire, patients after colon interposition by necessity have a poor general quality of life. Even long after the operation they have a broad spectrum of persisting symptoms. Prior to surgery, patients should be informed about the disabling long-term functional outcome of a colon interposition.