A unique pattern of cytokeratin (CK) 7/20 immunostaining (diffuse staining with CK7 and surface and superficial crypt staining with CK20) has been reported to be useful in differentiating Barrett esophagus (BE) from intestinal metaplasia of the stomach. However, there are conflicting results regarding the prevalence of a BE CK7/20 staining pattern in BE between different studies. Therefore, this study was performed to determine the degree of variability in interpretation of a BE CK7/20 pattern and to determine the reasons for variability when present. Esophageal and gastric mucosal biopsies from 67 patients with BE and antral intestinal metaplasia at 2 institutions were immunostained for CK7/20. All cases were evaluated for the presence of a BE CK7/20 pattern by 2 gastrointestinal pathologists from each institution, and the degree of agreement between institutions was determined. To determine the effect of tissue fixation and staining methods on the pattern of CK7/20 staining, unstained slides were exchanged between institutions, stained separately by each institution, and reexamined by all pathologists. There was excellent agreement on the presence of a BE CK7/20 staining pattern between pathologists at the same institution but only moderate agreement between pathologists at different institutions (71% overall, kappa = 0.58). Among BE cases, a BE CK7/20 staining pattern was identified in 50 (96%) of 52 cases by Cleveland Clinic Foundation pathologists but only 35 (67%) of 52 cases by Brigham and Women's Hospital pathologists. The major source of disagreement related to the interpretation of weak or variable CK7 staining of deep intestinalized mucosa in BE biopsies that were fixed in Hollande, but not those that were fixed in formalin. After the creation of a new set of criteria for a positive BE CK7/20 staining pattern, which took into account the effects of Hollande's fixative, the degree of agreement between pathologists at each of the 2 institutions was excellent (100%, kappa value = 1.0). Therefore, the CK7/20 staining pattern is influenced by the type of fixative used. Only a moderate level of interobserver agreement among pathologists regarding a BE CK7/20 pattern can be achieved if one is not aware of these effects. Nevertheless, specific criteria for interpretation of CK7/20 staining can be successfully applied between institutions and need to be developed before use of this technique in clinical practice.