 BACKGROUND: Endoscopic ablation of Barrett's esophagus has been described in which various thermocoagulation modalities are used in combination with a high dose of a proton pump inhibitor. No randomized comparison of ablation strategies has been published. METHODS: Referred patients were screened to identify those with Barrett's esophagus 2 to 7 cm in length, without high-grade dysplasia or cancer. Included patients received pantoprazole (40 mg twice a day), followed by randomization to treatment with argon plasma coagulation (APC) or multipolar electrocoagulation (MPEC). The primary outcome measure was the number of treatment sessions required for endoscopic ablation. RESULTS: Of 235 patients screened, 52 were randomized. The mean length of Barrett's esophagus was 3.1 cm in the MPEC group vs. 4.0 cm in the APC group (p = 0.03). Otherwise, the treatment groups were similar with regard to baseline characteristics. The mean number of treatment sessions required for endoscopic ablation was 2.9 for MPEC vs. 3.8 for APC (p = 0.04) in an intention-to-treat analysis (p = 0.249, after adjustment for the difference in length of Barrett's esophagus). The proportion of patients in which ablation was endoscopically achieved proximal to the gastroesophageal junction was 88% for the MPEC group vs. 81% for the APC group (p = 0.68) and histologically achieved in 81% for MPEC vs. 65% for APC (p = 0.21). The mean time required for the first treatment session was 6 minutes with MPEC vs. 10 minutes with APC (p = 0.01) in per protocol analysis. There was no serious adverse event, but transient moderate to severe upper-GI symptoms occurred after MPEC in 8% vs. 13% after APC (p = 0.64). Conclusions Although there were no statistically significant differences, ablation of Barrett's esophagus with pantoprazole and MPEC required numerically fewer treatment sessions, and endoscopic and histologic ablation was achieved in a greater proportion of patients compared with treatment with pantoprazole and APC.