Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is currently defined as a condition that develops when the reflux of stomach contents causes recurrent symptoms and/or complications. The clinical presentation of GERD has been recognized to be much broader than before, when the typical symptoms of heartburn and acid regurgitation were considered as the main clinical presentation. However, now it is recognized that GERD can present with various other mainly extraesophageal symptoms, abdominal pain, and even sleep disturbance. Moreover, there is an important overlap with functional gastrointestinal disorders such as functional dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome. The morphologic spectrum of esophageal involvement in GERD encompasses erosive (erosive reflux disease ), Barrett's esophagus (BE), and nonerosive reflux disease (NERD). However, there is still no consensus on whether GERD represents one disease that can progress from NERD to ERD and BE, or whether it is a spectrum of different conditions with its own clinical, pathophysiologic, and endoscopic characteristics. Recently published data suggest that mild erosive esophagitis behaves in a way similar to NERD and that there is considerable movement between these categories. But follow-up data also show that after 2 years, some patients with NERD or GERD Los Angeles A or B went on to develop severe GERD or even BE. A practical approach is to categorize patients with reflux symptoms into "functional heartburn" (ie, reflux symptoms and negative endoscopy and absent objective evidence of acid reflux into the esophagus), NERD (negative endoscopy but positive documentation of acid reflux into the esophagus), and ERD (erosions documented endoscopically). In conclusion, it appears that GERD is a disease with a spectrum of clinical and endoscopic manifestations, with characteristics that make it a continuum and not a categorical condition with separate entities. It is difficult to clearly delineate the spectrum of GERD based on the clinical, endoscopic, and pathophysiologic characteristics, but therapeutic trials and follow-up studies suggest that GERD is not composed of different conditions.