 INTRODUCTION: Ablation of Barrett's esophagus using Argon plasma coagulation (APC) is usually followed by the formation of a neosquamous epithelium. Investigating simple columnar or stratified squamous epithelium associated cytokeratin and microRNA (miRNA) expression in neo-squamous epithelium could help determine the identity and stability of the neosquamous epithelium. METHODS: Nine patients underwent ablation of Barrett's esophagus with APC. Biopsies were collected from Barrett's esophagus mucosa and proximal normal squamous epithelium before ablation, and from neosquamous and normal squamous epithelium after ablation. Additional esophageal mucosal biopsies from ten nonrefluxing subjects were used as a reference. RNA was extracted and real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to measure the expression of the cytokeratins CK-8 and CK-14 and the microRNAs miR-143 and miR-205. RESULTS: CK-8 and miR-143 expression were significantly higher in Barrett's esophagus mucosa, compared to neosquamous and normal squamous epithelium before and after APC, whereas miRNA-205 and CK-14 expression was significantly lower in Barrett's esophagus mucosa compared to all categories of squamous mucosa. The expression of CK-8, CK-14, miR-205, and miR-143 was similar between neosquamous epithelium compared to normal squamous epithelium in patients with Barrett's esophagus. Only miR-143 expression was significantly higher in neosquamous and normal squamous epithelium before and after APC compared to normal squamous epithelium from control subjects (p < 0.004). CONCLUSIONS: The expression levels of cytokeratins and miRNAs studied in post-ablation neosquamous epithelium and normal squamous epithelium in patients with Barrett's esophagus are similar. In patients with Barrett's esophagus, miR-143 expression is still elevated in both neosquamous mucosa, and the squamous mucosa above the metaplastic segment, suggesting that this mucosa may not be normal; i.e., it is different to that seen in subjects without Barrett's esophagus. miR-143 could promote a Barrett's epithelium gene expression pattern, and this could have a role in development of Barrett's esophagus.