 UNLABELLED: INTRODUCTION In the past two decades, the increased frequency of distal esophageal adenocarcinoma, esophagogastric junction and proximal gastric adenocarcinoma has been observed. The vast majority of these tumours are diagnosed in advanced stages, when the prognosis is poorer than in other gastric cancers. OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to analyze the demographic and clinicopathological characteristics of patients operated on for Barrett's, cardia and distal gastric adenocarcinomas, as well as to study the influence of manifestations of each cancerogenetic indication on the studied clinicopathological parameters and to analyze the 5-year survival rate of patients surgically treated for cardia adenocarcinoma in relation to the patients operated on for distal gastric adenocarcinoma. METHODS: We analyzed gender and age, tumour type, depth of tumour invasion, involvement of blood and lymph vessels in 66 patients surgically treated at the Centre for Oesophageal Surgery of the Institute for Digestive Diseases of the Belgrade Clinical Centre. RESULTS: Except for significant differences in the depth of tumour invasion during surgery, there were no other statistically significant differences between the studied groups of patients. In the patients operated on for Barrett's and cardia cancers, the tumours invaded more deeply the wall layers, i.e. they were significantly more invasive than the distal gastric tumour. The lymph node involvement was present in 87.5% of patients with Barrett's cancer, in 80% with cardia cancer and in 87% with distal gastric cancer. The 3-year survival rate of patients operated on for cardia cancer was 47.4% and the 5-year survival rate was 31.6%, while the 3-year survival rate of patients operated on for distal gastric cancer was 46.2% and the 5-year survival rate was 34.6%. These differences were not statistically significant (Wilcoxon 0.036; p = 0.85). Singly, the patients' gender, cancer type and the degree of tumour differentiation had no influence on the length of patients' postsurgical survival rate. CONCLUSION: At the time of diagnosis cardia cancer and cancers developed at the location of the Barrett's oesophagus, developed significant deeper per continuitatem than gastric cancer. There were no other differences in regard to the analyzed clinicopathological parameters among the tumours of these three locations, and there was no difference between the 3-year and 5-year survival rate between the patients operated on for gastric cancer and cardia cancer. Each studied clinicopathological parameter had no influence on the illness course.