AIM: Due to surgery s high mortality and morbidity, local therapeutic techniques are required for Barrett s high-grade dysplasia (BHGD) and early gastric cancer (EGC). Various techniques are available for endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) in the GI tract. The " suck and cut technique, which uses a transparent cap or modified multiband variceal ligator, is usually the most practiced method. A multiband ligator (ML) allows sequential resection without the need for submucosal injection and endoscope withdrawal. The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of EMR with a ML device in the treatment of Barrett s high-grade dysplasia and early gastric cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Prospective study. Eight consecutive patients (4 men; median age, 62 years; range 38-89 years) with BHGD (4) or EGC (4) were treated. EMR was performed with a multiband ligator in order to create a pseudopolyp and then permit snare polypectomy of flat mucosal lesions. The pseudopolyp was resected by using pure coagulating current. No submucosal saline injection was administered before resection. RESULTS: A total of 8 consecutive patients were treated with the multiband ligator (ML) technique. Barrett s esophagus (BE): one patient with long BE received 3 EMR sessions. Three patients presented with short BE and received 1 EMR session each. The histology of the EMR specimens confirmed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with submucosal infiltration (1 patient) and BHGD (3 patients). Early gastric cancer (EGC): 3 patients had EGC (type IIa) and 1 patient had high-grade dysplasia. EMR was accomplished in 1 session for each patient. The histology of EMR specimens confirmed a mucinous adenocarcinoma with submucosal infiltration (1 patient), EGC (2 patients), and HGD (1 patient). Complications (mild esophageal stenosis, minor bleeding) occurred in 2 patients. CONCLUSIONS: EMR has diagnostic and therapeutic implications, and represents a superior diagnostic modality as compared to traditional biopsy. By means of EMR the resected mucosa is pathologically examined, and the lesion may be appropriately treated. EMR-ML is a safe and effective technique for the treatment of superficial lesions of the digestive tract, and is accepted as an alternative to surgical therapy for non-invasive lesions. Long-term follow-up is needed to determine the clinical impact of this method.