 AIMS: C1q, an element of the first component of complement, is known to be expressed by interdigitating and follicular dendritic cells in the spleen, where it has been suggested that C1q is involved in capturing immune complexes. The present study investigated whether C1q is expressed in Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma and, if so, whether its expression is associated with dendritic cells. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Endoscopic biopsy or operative surgical specimens were obtained from 15 patients with Barrett's esophagus, 13 patients with esophageal adenocarcinoma and 12 patients whose biopsy specimens did not show the presence of specialized intestinal metaplasia or adenocarcinoma. Barrett's esophagus was diagnosed by the presence of a macroscopic area of columnar-lined esophagus as well as microscopic intestinal metaplasia with goblet cells. Immunohistochemistry utilizing anti-C1q and markers for dendritic cells and macrophages was performed on sections of tissue samples embedded in paraffin. Double immunostaining with C1q/CD83 and C1q/CD68 was used to analyze the possible co-localization of C1q with dendritic cells and macrophages. The expression of C1q by dendritic cells and macrophages was also examined in in vitro studies using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting. RESULTS: In all specimens studied, C1q expression was detected as being distributed irregularly throughout the lamina propria. A computerized quantitative analysis showed that C1q expression was significantly higher in tissue specimens without specialized intestinal-type metaplasia than in Barrett's esophagus specimens and specimens with adenocarcinoma. Double immunostaining revealed that dendritic cells and macrophages expressed C1q in all analyzed esophageal specimens. The expression of C1q by dendritic cells and macrophages was also demonstrated in in vitro studies using RT-PCR and Western blotting. CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that reduced levels of the expression of C1q by dendritic cells and macrophages in the esophagus may play a role in the formation of immune responses associated with the formation of specialized intestinal metaplasia and the development of adenocarcinoma.