 BACKGROUND: Dysplastic Barrett's epithelium (BE) persists after chemoradiation therapy for esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) arising in Barrett's esophagus. This phenomenon may present a significant risk for development of metachronous adenocarcinoma. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the safety and efficacy of endoscopic cryoablation therapy for persistent dysplastic BE in patients with complete clinical response after definitive chemoradiation therapy for EAC. DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study. SETTING: Single National Cancer Institute Comprehensive Cancer Center experience. PATIENTS: Radiation and endoscopic oncology treatment records were reviewed between January 2004 and September 2009. Fourteen patients with EAC who had been treated with definitive chemoradiation therapy followed by cryoablation were identified. INTERVENTION: Cryoablation therapy. MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Reduction in Prague Classification and dysplasia status following cryoablation therapy. Complications reported at 24 hour after the procedure telephone survey and at subsequent endoscopy. RESULTS: After complete clinical response of EAC to chemoradiation therapy, the median length of persistent BE was Prague classification C1M4 (C = circumferential extent, M = maximal extent). Cryoablation reduced the median length of persistent BE to Prague classification C0M1 (P = .009 with respect to circumferential extent and P = .004 with respect to maximal extent of BE). All 14 patients had dysplastic BE. Cryoablation resulted in histological downgrading in all 14 patients. Among patients with high-grade dysplasia, 20% (2/10) were reduced to low-grade dysplasia, 60% (6/10) to BE with no dysplasia, and 20% (2/10) to no BE. Among patients with low-grade dysplasia, 75% (3/4) were reduced to BE with no dysplasia, and 25% (1/4) to no BE. The median number of cryoablation treatments administered to the 14 patients evaluated was 1 (mean 1.5, range 1-5). Eighty-six percent (12/14) of patients reported no complaints during the 24 hours after cryoablation. No occurrences of perforation and no esophageal strictures were reported at surveillance endoscopy. LIMITATIONS: Single-center, retrospective design involving a small number of patients. CONCLUSION: Our observations suggest that cryoablation therapy is safe and effective for the treatment of persistent BE after definitive chemoradiation.