 BACKGROUND: Oesophageal papilloma and Barrett's oesophagus are benign lesions known as risk factors of carcinoma in the oesophagus. Therefore, it is important to diagnose these early changes before neoplastic transformation. METHOD: Autofluorescence endoscopy is a fast and non-invasive method of imaging of tissues based on the natural fluorescence of endogenous fluorophores. The aim of this study was to prove the diagnostic utility of autofluorescence endoscopy with digital image processing in histological diagnosis of endoscopic findings in the upper digestive tract, primarily in the imaging of oesophageal papilloma. RESULTS: During the retrospective analysis of about 200 endoscopic procedures in the upper digestive tract, 67 cases of benign, precancerous or cancerous changes were found. White light endoscopy (WLE) image, single-channel (red or green) autofluorescence images, as well as green and red fluorescence intensities in two modal fluorescence image and red-to-green (R/G) ratio (Numerical Colour Value, NCV) were correlated with histopathologic results. The NCV analysis in autofluorescence imaging (AFI) showed increased R/G ratio in cancerous changes in 96% vs. 85% in WLE. Simultaneous analysis with digital image processing allowed us to diagnose suspicious tissue as cancerous in all of cases. Barrett's metaplasia was confirmed in 90% vs. 79% (AFI vs. WLE), and 98% in imaging with digital image processing. In benign lesions, WLE allowed us to exclude tissue as malignant in 85%. Using autofluorescence endoscopy R/G ratio was increased in only 10% of benign changes causing the picture to be interpreted as suspicious, but when both methods were used together, 97.5% were cases excluded as malignancies. Mean R/G ratios were estimated to be 2.5 in cancers, 1.25 in Barrett's metaplasia and 0.75 in benign changes and were statistically significant (p=0.04). CONCLUSION: Autofluorescence imaging is a sensitive method to diagnose precancerous and cancerous early stages of the diseases located in oesophagus. Especially in two-modal imaging including white light endoscopy, autofluorescence imaging with digital image processing seems to be a useful modality of early diagnostics. Also in observation of papilloma changes, it facilitates differentiation between neoplastic and benign lesions and more accurate estimation of the risk of potential malignancy.