 BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Differential Normalized Fluorescence (DNF) technique has been used to distinguish high-grade dysplasia from non-dysplastic Barrett's esophagus. This technology may assist gastroenterologists in targeting biopsies, reducing the number of biopsies using the standard protocol. In the presence of reactive atypia/inflammation, it becomes difficult for the pathologist to differentiate non-dysplastic Barrett's esophagus from Barrett's esophagus with low-grade dysplasia. Before DNF technique may be used to guide target biopsies, it is critical to know whether reactive atypia/inflammation in non-dysplastic Barrett's may result in false positives. This study was conducted to determine whether DNF technique is adversely affected by the presence of reactive atypia/inflammation in non-dysplastic Barrett's esophagus resulting in false positives. STUDY DESIGN/MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four hundred ten-nanometer laser light was used to induce autofluorescence of Barrett's mucosa in 49 patients. The clinical study included 37 males and 12 females. This was a blinded retrospective data analysis study. A total of 303 spectra were collected and matched to non-dysplastic Barrett's biopsy results. One hundred seventy-five spectra were collected from areas with a pathology of non-dysplastic Barrett's esophagus with reactive atypia/inflammation. One hundred twenty-eight spectra were collected from areas with non-dysplastic Barrett's esophagus without reactive changes/inflammation. The spectra were analyzed using the DNF Index at 480 nm and classified as positive or negative using the threshold of -0.75 × 10(-3). RESULTS: Using DNF technique, 92.6% of non-dysplastic samples with reactive atypia/inflammation were classified correctly (162/175). 92.2% of non-dysplastic samples without reactive atypia/inflammation were classified correctly (118/128). Comparing the ratios of false positives among the two sample groups, there was not a statistically significant difference between the two groups. CONCLUSION: Using DNF technique for classification of non-dysplastic Barrett's mucosa does not result in false-positive readings due to reactive atypia/inflammation. Target biopsies guided by DNF technique may drastically reduce the number of pinch biopsies using the standard biopsy protocol.