 BACKGROUND: Endoluminal therapy is an option for selected patients with Barrett's esophagus and high-grade dysplasia or early cancer. OBJECTIVE: To assess long-term outcomes of patients treated with endoluminal therapy with the goal of complete eradication of all dysplasia and intestinal metaplasia. DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study. PATIENTS: Selected patients referred with dysplastic Barrett's esophagus. INTERVENTION: Endoluminal therapy combining resection and photodynamic therapy, radiofrequency ablation, and/or argon plasma coagulation treatment was individualized based on patient and lesion characteristics, technique evolution, and interval response. MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: We assessed complete eradication of dysplasia, all intestinal metaplasia, and recurrences. RESULTS: A total of 166 patients were treated and had at least 1 year of follow-up. Complete elimination of neoplasia was achieved in 157 patients (95%) and complete elimination of intestinal metaplasia in 137 patients (83%). After therapy, patients were followed for 33 (range 18-58) months. Among patients who achieved complete elimination of intestinal metaplasia, subsequent recurrent intestinal metaplasia was detected in 48 (35%) and dysplasia in 12 (9%). Among those who achieved only complete elimination of dysplasia, recurrent dysplasia was detected in 6 of 19 patients (32%). Multifocal dysplasia and patient's age were dysplasia and/or carcinoma recurrence risk factors in the multivariable and univariable analyses. Complete elimination of intestinal metaplasia was a protective factor in the univariable analysis. Retreatment achieved remission in 90% of cases. Forty-two patients (23.9%) had complications, including 21 with stricture (11.9%) and 1 treatment-related death. LIMITATIONS: Retrospective study and evolution of endoscopic modalities. CONCLUSION: Multiple-mode endoluminal therapy for Barrett's esophagus with high-grade dysplasia or early cancer with intention to complete eradication of all intestinal metaplasia was successful, with low observed recurrence of dysplasia or cancer. However, recurrence of intestinal metaplasia occurs in one-third of cases and supports continued endoscopic surveillance even after complete eradication.