 INTRODUCTION: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a condition in which the normal squamous epithelium of the esophagus is replaced with metaplastic intestinal-type epithelium. This epithelium can progress sequentially from metaplasia to low-grade dysplasia, then to high-grade dysplasia and finally to invasive adenocarcinoma. Many factors that appear to be risk factors for the presence of BE include obesity, the presence of hiatal hernia, and interestingly, the absence of Helicobacter pylori infection. THE AIM: The aim of this study was to determine the predictive factors for progression of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) to BE. METHODS: 42 patients with endoscopically diagnosed and histopathologically verified BE were included in this prospective study. We analysed predictive factors such as: age, sex, obesity, alcohol consumption and smoking, reflux symptom duration in this patients, prevalence of short and long segment of BE, and the presence of hiatal hernia. After endoscopic examination of these patients, the presence of BE was verified with histopathological examination and finally, infection with H. pylori was determined. RESULTS: Among 42 subjects, 25 (59%) were males and 17 (41%) were females, with mean age of 52.8±3.28 years. Obesity was present in 24 of 42 patients (57%). 27 of 42 patients (64%) were smokers. Symptom duration in this patients was approximately 9.4 years. From total number of patients, 52% were with SSBE and 48% patients were with LSBE. Hiatal hernia was present in 64% of patients, of which 66% were with LSBE and 34% with SSBE. In these patients, prevalence of infection with H. pylori was present in 12% of cases, 9.5% in patients with SSBE and 2.5% in patients with LSBE. CONCLUSIONS: The important risk factors for appearance of BE in GERD patients were male sex, middle age, smooking and alcohol consumption. Obesity is an important factor for development of BE. Most of patients with BE also had hiatal hernia, in majority of cases these were patients with LSBE. The prevalence of infection with H. Pylori in patients with BE was lower and this may predict a protective role of this microorganism.