 BACKGROUND: New endoscopic imaging techniques, such as autofluorescence imaging (AFI) and narrow-band imaging (NBI), have been developed to improve the detection of neoplastic lesions in Barrett's esophagus (BE). OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical utility of AFI and magnification NBI to detect high-grade dysplasia (HGD) and early esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) and the interobserver agreement. DESIGN: Prospective tandem study of eligible patients. SETTING: Single, academic tertiary care center. PATIENTS: Forty-two patients with a history of confirmed BE were prospectively enrolled. INTERVENTIONS: The BE segment was examined under high-definition white-light endoscopy, and the presence of visible lesions was recorded. Subsequently, AFI and magnification NBI were performed in tandem on areas of the BE segment away from visible lesions; images obtained by these 2 systems were graded according to the color of reflected light and surface patterns, respectively. Biopsy specimens were obtained at the end of the procedure. MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value (NPV) of the AFI and NBI patterns for the detection of HGD/EAC and interobserver agreement. RESULTS: Of the 42 patients enrolled, 14 (33%) had HGD/EAC. On patient-based analysis, AFI alone had a sensitivity, specificity, and NPV of 50%, 61%, and 71%, respectively, and the overall accuracy for the detection of HGD/EAC patients was 57%. By using magnification NBI in tandem fashion, the sensitivity and NPV improved to 71% and 76%, respectively, with a decrease in specificity to 46% and in overall accuracy to 55%. The 2 techniques had moderate interobserver agreement for both the patterns and prediction of histology. LIMITATIONS: Uncontrolled study performed at an academic center by expert endoscopists in a high-risk population. CONCLUSIONS: By using a multimodality endoscope, both AFI and magnification NBI had limited clinical accuracy and moderate overall interobserver agreement. AFI does not appear to be useful as a broad-based technique for the detection of neoplasia in patients with BE.