OBJECTIVES: Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is considered common in the elderly and may present with various symptoms, such as heartburn, regurgitation, dysphagia, or chest pain. In this study, we evaluated the patterns of symptomatic GERD and the spectrum of disease activity in the elderly. METHODS: We prospectively studied 476 predominantly male veterans who were referred for upper endoscopy because of symptoms or signs suggestive of upper gastrointestinal disease. All patients were interviewed immediately before the procedure by a physician who used a standardized symptom questionnaire. Endoscopic findings were categorized and graded according to their extent and severity. The prevalence, nature, and severity of esophageal symptoms and their relationship to endoscopic disease severity were then analyzed. Comparisons were made between two age groups, the young (age less than 65 yr old, mean age 55 yr, age range 30-65 yr), and the elderly (more than 66 yr old, mean age 72 yr, age range 66-90 yr). RESULTS: Heartburn without esophagitis was noted in 28% of young and 24% of elderly patients. Hiatal hernia without esophagitis was noted in 15 % of young and 18% of the elderly. The prevalence of various stages of GERD was similar in the two groups (p > 0.1, chi2 test; odds ratio: 0.983; 95% CI: 0.651-1.48). Quantitative esophageal symptom analysis revealed remarkably similar symptom severity scores for both groups for GERD stages I-IV, as well as for symptomatic controls. However, elderly patients with Barrett's esophagus were significantly less symptomatic than the young (symptom index 2.4 +/- 0.6 vs. 4.88 +/- 1.01, p < 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Among symptomatic adults undergoing upper endoscopy, the elderly appear to have prevalence rates, patterns, and features of symptomatic GERD that are generally similar to those of their younger counterparts. Nevertheless, the severity of symptoms in the subgroup of elderly with Barrett's esophagus is significantly less than in the young and may contribute to poor or delayed recognition of disease.