This study describes Fas (CD95) expression in Barrett's esophagus, adenocarcinomas of the esophagus, and three esophageal adenocarcinoma cell lines. Immunohistochemical analysis of Barrett's esophagus demonstrated cell surface expression of Fas protein. In contrast, 30.5% of esophageal adenocarcinomas examined by immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated faint cytoplasmic staining, and 69.5% were negative for Fas. Similar levels of Fas mRNA were identified in tumors compared to mRNA levels in esophageal squamous mucosa or Barrett's esophagus. An approximately Mr 48,000 Fas protein was identified by Western blot analysis in tumors that were negative for Fas expression by immunohistochemical analysis. The esophageal adenocarcinoma cell line Seg-1 was negative for Fas expression by immunohistochemical analysis, but Western blot analysis demonstrated abundant, appropriately sized Fas protein. In agreement with the immunohistochemical analysis, flow cytometry of Seg-1 showed minimal amounts of Fas on the cell surface, which correlated with resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis. No mutations in the Seg-1 Fas coding sequence or exon 1 were identified by sequence analysis. This was confirmed by transient transfection of COS cells with expression vectors generated from the Seg-1 Fas cDNA, which resulted in cell surface expression of the Fas protein. Stable transfection of Seg-1 with a Fas expression vector did not result in efficient Fas expression on the cell surface. Seg-1 cells, transiently transfected with a Fas-FLAG expression vector and examined for protein expression using confocal microscopy and an anti-FLAG antibody, showed that the Fas-FLAG protein was not present on the cell surface but was present in the cytoplasm. Taken together, these results indicate that expression of Fas on the cell surface by esophageal adenocarcinoma is reduced. In an esophageal adenocarcinoma cell line, wild-type Fas protein is retained in the cytoplasm, and this correlates with resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis. The retention of wild-type Fas protein within the cytoplasm may represent a mechanism by which malignant cells evade Fas-mediated apoptosis.