OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine whether antireflux surgery is more effective in producing loss of intestinal metaplasia located only at the gastroesophageal junction than it has been in patients with intestinal metaplasia extending up into the distal esophagus. SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: Biopsies of a normal appearing gastroesophageal junction will demonstrate cardiac mucosa containing goblet cells--the hallmark of intestinal metaplasia--in 10% to 15% of patients who are evaluated for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux. The incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and cardia is rising faster than any other cancer in America, and most of these cancers are found adjacent to areas of intestinal metaplasia. Antireflux surgery in patients with Barrett's esophagus may provide protection from progression to dysplasia and cancer; however, it does not reliably cause regression of the intestinal metaplasia. Less is known about the potential for intestinal metaplasia limited to the cardia (CIM) to regress. METHODS: Sixty patients with intestinal metaplasia of the esophagus or cardia had antireflux surgery. Patients in the intestinal (CIM) group (n = 15) had no endoscopically visible segment of columnar epithelium. Patients in the Barrett's group (n = 45) had columnar epithelium visible within the esophagus. Median follow-up was 25 months in each group. RESULTS: Postoperative biopsies showed complete loss of intestinal metaplasia in 73% of the patients with CIM compared with 4.4% of the patients with Barrett's. Low-grade dysplasia, present in 10 patients preoperatively, regressed in 7 patients (70%). No patient progressed to high-grade dysplasia or cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Loss of intestinal metaplasia after antireflux surgery is rare in patients with Barrett's, but occurred in most patients with CIM. This suggests that cardiac epithelium is dynamic and that microscopic areas of intestinal metaplasia are able to regress much more frequently than longer, visible segments of intestinal metaplasia.