BACKGROUND: Ocular involvement in panarteritis nodosa (PAN) has been reported to occur in 10 to 20% of patients. In 3 patients with acute visual disturbance we point out unusual findings. PATIENTS: Case 1. A 40-year-old man initially presented with papilledema together with partial optic atrophy in both eyes, later polyneuropathy, gangrene of the toes and myalgic pains developed. Caliber changes in the small arteries in the liver were seen angiographically and recognized as signs of PAN. Under treatment with cyclophosphamide und prednisone no relapse occurred during a follow-up of 2 years. Case 2. In a 67-year-old man who suffered from arterial hypertension and coronary heart disease, central retinal artery occlusion occurred, at first in the left and then later in the right eye. The clinically suspected diagnosis of PAN (arterial hypertension, myalgia, polyneuropathy) was confirmed by a muscle biopsy. During a follow-up of 4 years--including treatment with prednisone and cyclophosphamide--no relapse occurred. Case 3. A 16-year-old adolescent with throbbing headaches and a thickened right temporal artery reported visual disturbances. These were due to an inflammation of choroidal vessels of the right eye appearing as an initial sign of PAN. Histology revealed a necrotising arteritis of the temporal artery. He presented with signs of Raynaud's disease, cachexia and arterial hypertension. Multiple vasculitic changes were detected by aorto-arteriography. Five months after the visual deterioration an anterior spinal artery syndrome with quadriplegia developed. After a follow-up of 2 years and treatment with prednisone und cyclophosphamide, he still had paralysis of both legs. The visual acuity was 1.0 in each eye. CONCLUSION: PAN should be considered in differential diagnosis in patients with acute inflammatory signs of the optic nerve head, the choroid and/or the retina together with general signs of the disease. If the disease is suspected, a muscle biopsy is indicated.