The absence of technical defects is considered to be of great importance during carotid endarterectomy (CEA). In this context, both safe surgical technique and intraoperative quality control may be a fundamental part of the operative procedure. We have therefore undertaken a prospective study to evaluate the possible benefits of completion angiography in standard CEA using patch angioplasty. The objectives were three-fold: (1) to identify the incidence of defects requiring prompt revision; (2) to assess the perioperative stroke rate as well as the number of residual stenosis after 6 weeks in angiographically controlled patients and (3) to compare these results with a control group. From 1 January to 30 September 1999 111 patients with 115 consecutive CEAs which had completion angiography (Group A) were prospectively entered into this study. The results in group A were compared with a series of again 111 patients (Group B) which had 116 CEAs without intraoperative quality control between January and September in the year before. Surgical technique was identical in both groups. In general, risk factors were distributed evenly among both group with the exception that in group A were significantly more high-grade ipsilateral ICA stenoses while group B had more patients with diabetes and ipsilateral CT-defects. In group A, angiographic irregularities prompted us to immediate re-exploration in five patients (dilatation of severe ICA spasm 1; re-exploration of distal ICA occlusion 1; reopening of occluded ECA 3). With a 30 day mortality of 0% each perioperative stroke rate was comparable with 3/115 in group A and 3/116 in group B (P=1.0). 2/3 patients with neurological deficits in group A had early postoperative carotid thrombosis--in spite of a normal completion study. Duplex examination after 6 weeks revealed one asymptomatic ICA occlusion in each group. The incidence of residual stenosis (> or =50%) was not significantly different being 3.7% in group A and 3.2% in group B (P=0.85). When applying a safe and simple operative technique for CEA, the incidence of abnormalities warranting immediate correction appears to be a rare event and, therefore, the necessity for obligatory quality control may be questionable. On the other hand, completion DSA allows a simple documentation of the adequacy of the surgical procedure.