 RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: Experiments were designed to (1) compare the effects of iodinated contrast media (CM) on a rat model of arterial thrombosis, (2) evaluate which element of the ioxaglate solution supports its antithrombotic activity, and (3) investigate the interaction of ionic and non-ionic CM with the antiplatelet agent clopidogrel. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Carotid thrombosis was induced in rats by extravascular application of a filter paper soaked in FeCl3 (35% vol/wt), proximal to an ultrasonic flow probe. (1) The antithrombotic potential of low-osmolar ionic (ioxaglate Na/meglumine) or nonionic contrast media (iohexol and iodixanol) (all 1600 mg iodine/kg, IV) was assessed by measuring the time to occlusion (TTO) of the carotid artery and the thrombus weight (TW). (2) Isotonic saline and iso-osmolar (280 mOsm/kg) and hyperosmolar (560 mOsm/kg) solutions of meglumine hydrochloride, meglumine ioxaglate (560 mOsm/kg), sodium ioxaglate (600 mOsm/kg) and sodium and meglumine ioxaglate (commercial solution) were tested under similar conditions. (3) Interaction with clopidogrel was tested by injecting lower dose of CM (960 mg iodine/kg) 2 hours after clopidogrel (2 mg/kg per os). RESULTS: (1) Ioxaglate prolonged TTO when compared with saline (30.0 +/- 1.1 minute vs. 19.6 +/- 2.4 minutes, P< 0.001), whereas iohexol had no effect (21.3 +/- 1.3 minutes). Ioxaglate's effect was associated with a reduction in TW with ioxaglate versus saline (2.6 +/- 0.4 mg and 4.7 +/- 0.7 mg, respectively, P< 0.05) whereas TW remained unchanged in the iohexol group (4.2 +/- 0.4 mg). The nonionic dimer iodixanol induced a direct vasoconstrictor effect on the carotid artery and was consequently excluded from the study. (2) Neither iso-osmolar nor hyperosmolar solutions of meglumine had any effect on TTO whereas both sodium and meglumine salts of ioxaglic acid prolonged TTO, suggesting that the antithrombotic effect of ioxaglate is mediated by the ioxaglic acid moiety alone as neither meglumine, osmolality or sodium played a significant role. (3) A synergistic effect on TTO was found when ioxaglate was associated with clopidogrel whereas no such effect was observed with iohexol. CONCLUSIONS: These data show a greater in vivo antithrombotic potential for the ionic contrast medium ioxaglate than for the non-ionic contrast medium iohexol and, for the first time, a synergistic effect between a contrast medium and a platelet antiaggregant drug in vivo.