OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Reference textbooks on the intracranial complications of rhinosinusitis imply that many of the intracranial complications of rhinosinusitis can be prevented. We sought to examine whether or not this is true. STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective case series. METHODS: The study included 47 consecutive patients presenting with intracranial complications secondary to rhinosinusitis between 1992 to 1999 with a mean follow-up of 5 years and 1 month. RESULTS: The most common presenting symptoms of intracranial involvement were an altered mental state, headache, fever, seizure, vomiting, a unilateral weakness or hemiparesis, or a cranial nerve sign. These justify an urgent magnetic resonance imaging or computed tomography scan. The importance of imaging before a lumbar puncture cannot be overemphasized. Of particular note was the finding that 21 patients (45%) presented with a periorbital cellulitis or frontal swelling. Therefore, it does not follow that because a collection of pus presents anteriorly it precludes any intracranial involvement. More than half of our patients (55%) had visited their primary care physician with an upper respiratory tract infection and had been treated appropriately. Once any central symptoms or signs developed, there was little evidence of any significant delay in referral to our unit. Only six patients had a history of nasal disease, three having had recent sinus surgery and three having had nasal polyps. Nine patients had significant long-term morbidity, seven patients had epilepsy, one patient had dysphasia, and one patient had right arm weakness. The single death in our series was associated with a cavernous sinus thrombosis. CONCLUSIONS: The report emphasizes the need for surgeons to be alert to the diagnosis, particularly in patients with a periorbital abscess or frontal swelling. Sinus surgery has a role in obtaining pus for culture, as well as draining the sinus if it is in continuity with an intracranial collection. Intracranial infections secondary to rhinosinusitis occur sporadically and, although it appears that this cannot be prevented, early recognition and treatment are essential to reduce any subsequent morbidity or mortality.