PURPOSE: Behçet's syndrome is a progressive inflammatory disease which involves multiple systems. It is characterized by 3 main symptoms of iridocyclitis, and oral and genital ulcerations. Nervous system involvement is seen rarely in this clinical entity and is known as neurological Behçet's syndrome. Inflammation usually occurs in the brain stem, cerebellum and medulla spinalis. Voiding and erectile dysfunction can be due to progressive inflammatory reactions in the nervous and vascular systems. We prospectively evaluated the dysfunctional bladder and penis, and therapeutic options were evaluated prospectively. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 24 consecutive patients diagnosed with neurological Behçet's syndrome after neurological evaluation were enrolled in this study. Neurological involvement and localization of the nervous system were proved on evaluation. Voiding and erectile dysfunction was evaluated regardless of the presence of related symptoms, and the results were compared with those of controls. Patients with voiding dysfunction on urodynamic study were treated and reevaluated symptomatically after 3 and urodynamically after 6 months. RESULTS: The rate of erectile dysfunction in neurological Behçet's syndrome was 63%. Mixed type vasculogenic impotence, arterial insufficiency, veno-occlusive dysfunction and neurogenic impotence were identified in 7, 2, 2 and 1 patient, respectively. Detrusor instability was demonstrated in 12 patients with urgency incontinence, including 3 with detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia. Brain stem localization was determined in these patients on neurogenic evaluation. Significant improvement was observed with anticholinergic treatment and clean intermittent catheterization in 3 patients with detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia. Hypersensitive and hypocompliant detrusor was noted in patients with neurological Behçet's syndrome who had normal voiding habits. CONCLUSIONS: Incontinence or irritable bladder symptoms should not be considered innocuous clinical findings in neurological Behçet's syndrome. Lower urinary tract function should be evaluated in all patients with this neurological syndrome. The incidence of erectile dysfunction is approximately 65% and the therapeutic approach should be determined according to lower urinary tract function.