 BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIMS: The lesions in Behçet's colitis show aphthoid or punched-out ulceration, but the macroscopic types of lesion found have not been defined. To predict the clinical outcome in patients with Behçet's colitis according to the colonoscopic findings, we classified the characteristic colonic ulcers, evaluated the efficacy of medical treatment on colonoscopic lesions, and calculated the operation rates and recurrence rates relative to the macroscopic types. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The medical records and colonoscopic photographs of 50 patients with Behçet's colitis were reviewed. The colonic lesions were examined by colonoscopy in patients with Behçet's disease and gastrointestinal symptoms. The colonoscopic findings were categorized into three types of ulceration: volcano-like, geographic, and aphthous. The efficacy of medical treatment was assessed by follow-up colonoscopy or double-contrast barium enema four to eight weeks after treatment, and recurrence of the lesions was evaluated during the follow-up periods. Cumulative surgery rates were obtained using the Kaplan-Meier method. RESULTS: The macroscopic classification of colonic ulcers identified 25 of 50 patients (50%) with volcano-type lesions, 11 (22%) with the geographic type, and 14 (28%) with the aphthous type. The rates of complete remission after medical treatment and surgery, respectively, were six of 25 (24%) and 13 of 25 (52%) with volcano-type ulcerations; eight of 11 (73%) and one of 11 (9%) with the geographic type; and nine of 14 (64%) and two of 14 (14%) with the aphthous type. The endoscopic and clinical recurrence rates were nine of 19 (47%) in volcano-type ulcerations, one of nine (11%) in the geographic type, and one of 11 (9%) in the aphthous type. CONCLUSION: Volcano-type ulcerations in Behçet's colitis showed a less favorable response to medical treatment, a more frequent requirement for surgery, and more frequent recurrences than the geographic and aphthous types of ulcerations.