OBJECTIVE: Arterial and venous thrombosis are among the clinical features of Behçet's disease (BD), the pathogenesis of which is not completely understood. In this study, we investigated whether hyperhomocysteinaemia, being a well known risk factor for thrombosis, is also a contributive risk factor for the arterial and venous thrombosis of BD. METHODS: Eighty-four patients fulfilling the criteria of the International Study Group for Behçet's Disease (54 males, 30 females, mean age 36+/-9 yr) were enrolled. All the patients were carefully screened for a history of venous thrombosis and were separated into two groups with respect to thrombosis history. Thirty-six healthy individuals (23 males, 13 females), matched for age and sex with the BD group, were included as a negative control group. Patients were excluded if they had any condition that might affect plasma homocysteine concentration. As methotrexate (MTX) causes hyperhomocysteinaemia, we also included 29 rheumatoid arthritis patients (five males, 24 females) receiving MTX weekly. Fasting plasma homocysteine concentrations were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography. The data were analysed with the chi(2) test and Student's t-test. RESULTS: The highest homocysteine concentrations were found in the MTX group (17.5+/-5.3 micromol/l). Mean plasma homocysteine concentrations in BD patients were significantly higher than in the healthy controls (11.5+/-5.3 vs. 8.8+/-3.1 micromol/l, P<0.001). Among BD patients with a history of thrombosis, 20 of 31 (64%) had hyperhomocysteinaemia, and this was significantly higher than in those without thrombosis (9%). On the other hand, there was no significant difference between patients with non-thrombotic BD and healthy controls (P>0.05). In patients with thrombosis, we found no correlation between the duration of the post-thrombotic period and homocysteine concentration. Among all the variables investigated, only hyperhomocysteinaemia was found to be related to thrombosis. CONCLUSION: Hyperhomocysteinaemia may be assumed to be an independent risk factor for venous thrombosis in BD. Unlike the factor V Leiden mutation, hyperhomocysteinaemia is a correctable risk factor. This finding might lead to new avenues in the prophylaxis of thrombosis in BD.