INTRODUCTION: Behçet disease is a multisystemic vascularitis. Ocular affection is one of the major criteria of this disease. The aim of this study is to specify the clinical, therapeutical characteristics and the prognosis factors of the ocular affection in patients having BD and admitted to the dermatology department. PATIENTS AND METHODS: It is a retrospective investigation carried out in the dermatology department of Ibn Rochd university hospital center of Casablanca, Morroco, from Jannuary 1990 until December 2003. Two patient groups have been distinguished. The first one involved 50 patients (44,2%) having BD with ocular affection, and the second group involved 63 patients having BD without ocular affection. RESULTS: The mean age was 29 +/- 8 years in the first group VS 30 +/- 7,9 years in the 2(nd) group. The ocular affection was more frequent in males than in females (P < 0.05). The ocular manifestations were marked by uveitis and retinal periphlebitis. The frequency of the cutaneomucosal and joint manifestations was similar in both groups, whereas neurologic and vascular with ocular affections. The choice of the treatment depended on the type of ocular affection. Evolution was marked by blindness in 6 patients (12%). DISCUSSION: The ocular affection comes second after the cutanous mucuous affection. Males are more clearly affected than females. This allows saying that there is a marked effect of the sexual hormones on the ocular affection. Age is not predictive of this ocular affection. The ocular affection was severe in our series and was dominated by uveitis and vascularitis. We insist on the severity of ocular Behçet and its evolution? Risk toward blindness especially concerning young man. Currently, the treatment is not codified; however, the encouraging outcome obtained with some immunosuppressive therapies would be better if this treatment was set up early. CONCLUSION: This study enebed us to re-examine the ocular manifestations of the Behçet disease in the Maroccan population by the means of a consultation of Dermatology. Il should be noted that it is worse forecast because on the one hand of its frequent association to vascular and neurological affections and other share of the delay of consultation noted at the majority of our patients.