 OBJECTIVE: The aim of this article is to report our experience in the surgical treatment of arterial aneurysms in patients with Behçet disease. METHODS: From October 2001 through May 2004, 18 arterial aneurysms were diagnosed in 16 Behçet patients. All patients were male. The patients ranged in age from 24 to 52 years (mean, 37.4 +/- 5.2 years). There were six abdominal aortic, three common femoral, two iliac, two popliteal, two superficial femoral, and two anterior tibial aneurysms and one subclavian artery aneurysm. All patients but four were in remission at the time of diagnosis. Those 4 patients received immunosuppressive therapy before the surgical intervention to induce remission. After hospital discharge, all patients were followed up regularly at 3-month intervals. The mean duration of follow-up was 17 +/- 4.2 months (range, 6-24 months). RESULTS: All patients underwent a successful surgical intervention. During the study period, we performed five aortic tube graft interpositions, two aortofemoral bypasses, one aortobifemoral bypass, three common femoral artery graft interpositions, and two femoropopliteal bypasses. The popliteal artery (n = 2), anterior tibial artery (n = 2), and subclavian artery (n = 1) aneurysms were repaired primarily. There was no in-hospital mortality. One patient with an abdominal aortic aneurysm had to undergo reoperation because of postoperative bleeding. The postoperative hospital stay was 8.5 +/- 4.3 days. Two patients were lost to follow-up. During the follow-up period, two false aneurysms of the common femoral artery were repaired with a graft interposition procedure. Another patient who had undergone an aortic tube graft interposition was readmitted 9 months later with an external iliac artery aneurysm. The external iliac artery was ligated through a retroperitoneal approach, and femorofemoral bypass was performed. In addition, one femoropopliteal interposition graft was occluded, without disabling ischemia. CONCLUSIONS: Although aneurysmal disease is rare in Behçet disease, it can complicate the clinical picture and cause life-threatening complications. We believe that the establishment of remission before the surgical intervention decreases the incidence of postoperative complications. Because recurrence at the site of anastomosis is possible, prolonged monitoring is required.