BACKGROUND: Increased serum levels of homocysteine (Hcy) have been reported in patients with Behçet's disease (BD) with an established risk factor for vascular involvement. Recently, the authors demonstrated that elevated Hcy levels are associated with ocular involvement in such patients. On the other hand, elevated levels of Hcy can result from genetic errors. Indeed, a mutation in the 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR C677T) gene influences Hcy metabolism and, therefore, MTHFR C677T polymorphism provokes hyperhomocysteinaemia. AIM: To investigate the possible genetic factor for the elevation of plasma Hcy level in patients with BD by examining gene interaction with the MTHFR C677T polymorphism, a crucial factor of the Hcy metabolism. In addition, the authors aimed to evaluate if there is an association between the C677T polymorphism and the presence of ocular involvement in such patients. METHOD: A total of 59 patients with BD (25 men, 34 women) with a mean age of 34.9 years and 42 age and sex matched healthy control subjects (19 men, 23 women; mean age 32.2) were included in this investigation. MTHFR gene polymorphism was investigated by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) of a genomic DNA fragment at nucleotide 677 in all subjects in both groups. The genetic equilibrium is assumed for the gene frequencies of the MTHFR polymorphism in both samples. RESULTS: The genotype of the MTHFR gene differed between the Behçet's patients and control subjects (TT: 11.9 v 2.4%; CT: 55.9 v 61.9%; CC: 32.2 v 35.7 %). TT homozygous genotype was more frequently in BD patients than the controls, though the difference was not significant (p = 0.063). In BD patients with ocular involvement, however, the frequencies of MTHFR TT homogenetic type (27.8%) were significantly and statistically higher than those in BD patients without ocular involvement (4.9%, p = 0.022, odds ratio = 7.5), or the controls (2.4%, p = 0.003, odds ratio = 20.0). TT homozygous genotype was associated with an increased risk for ocular involvement. CONCLUSION: Elevated serum levels of Hcy seem to be a result of C677T polymorphism of the MTHFR gene, with increased TT individuals over CC and CT genotype BD patients. Although no association was shown between the MTHFR reductase C677T polymorphism and the increased risk of oral aphtahe or genital ulcers, a mutation in this gene was associated with an increased risk of ocular involvement, suggesting genetic instability with a potential initiation of Hcy lowering therapy in this patient group.