 OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical feature and strategy on diagnosis and treatment of cervical ulcer in Behcet's disease. METHODS: From Jan 2000 to Apr 2008, the medical documents of 6 cases with cervical ulcer in Behcet's disease were reviewed retrospectively, who were treated in No.2 hospital affiliated to Wenzhou Medical School RESULTS: (1) General information: all 6 patients with cervical ulcer were diagnosed as Behcet's disease clinically, the mean age of all patients is 33.5 years. (2) Clinical feature: the initial symptoms was oral ulcer in 5 cases and erythematic nodosum in 1 case. The typical characteristics of cervical ulcer in Behcet's disease was vaginal purulent discharge. Five among 6 cases presented it. The cervical ulcer in Behcet's disease exhibited the following features: the isolated well-defined ulcers with different size and different deep distributed on the uterine cervix, and the top of ulcer was covered by yellow discharge which was not easy to erase. The duration between the onset symptom and cervical ulcer was calculated to be 2.1 to 7 years. (3) Risk factors for cervical ulcer: operation of drawing intrauterine devices (IUD) in 2 cases, artifical abortion in 2 cases, cervical biopsy in 1 cases, and no factors in the other one case was identified. (4) Treatment: The cervical ulcer in Behcet's disease can be treated by the topical application of recombinant bovine basic fibroblast growth factor (rb-bFGF). If ulcer disease existing in other site, systemic corticosteroids management was warranted. (5) Recurrence: 1 case with recurrent disease was observed after 8 months when completing treatment, the other 5 cases did not show recurrence during 3 months-8 years follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: The cervical ulcer in Behcet's disease most commonly occurred after cervical operation. The diagnosis should be derived from comprehensive symptoms analysis. The topical application of rb-bFGF on ulcer site of cervix could get satisfied outcome. When necessary, systemic corticosteroids administration could be considered.