 BACKGROUND: Behçet's disease (BD) is a multisystem inflammatory disorder characterized by recurrent oral ulcers, genital ulcers and ocular inflammation, as well as skin, joint, vascular, pulmonary, central nervous system (CNS) and gastrointestinal tract manifestations. The etiopathogenesis of BD has not yet been identified; but it has generally been accepted that several environmental factors may induce an inflammatory attack in genetically susceptible individuals. In this study, we aimed to identify antigens that could elicit high-titer IgG responses by the serological analysis of recombinant expression of cDNA libraries method (SEREX). METHODS: We screened a human testis cDNA library with pooled sera obtained from 4 BD patients by SEREX. Antigens that were identified with the initial analysis were selected for seroreactivity analysis of a larger group of BD patients (n=78) and controls (n=66) by serological immunoscreening. RESULTS: We observed seroreactivity against 6 antigens using the pooled sera. These included rabaptin 5 (RABPT5), PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), switch associated protein 70 (SWAP70), interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (IFIT2), ankyrin repeat domain 20 family, member A1 (ANKRD20A1), and an unknown antigen. Eleven out of 82 (13.4%) BD patients were found to have antibodies elicited against PINK1 antigen, when none of the control sera showed reactivity (p=0.001). There was no significant difference in the frequency of other defined antigens between the patient and control groups. However, among BD clinical sub-groups, anti-SWAP70 antibodies were found to associate with vascular involvement. DISCUSSION: In this study, antibodies against PINK1 were found to specifically associate with BD while SWAP70 antibody was associated with clinical sub-groups of BD. Although variations in both genetic background and environmental factors may affect the outcome of serological responses, our results suggest that serological screening can be used to identify antigens that elicit antibody responses associated with BD.