 PURPOSE: To demonstrate the effect of bevacizumab compared with triamcinolone acetonide for the treatment of persistent cystoid macular edema in noninfectious uveitis. METHODS: The medical records of 31 eyes of 31 patients with uveitic cystoid macular edema that had persisted despite conventional treatment were reviewed. Ten eyes received 1.25 mg of intravitreal bevacizumab (IVB), 11 eyes received 4 mg of intravitreal triamcinolone acetonide (IVTA), and 10 eyes received 40 mg of posterior sub-Tenon triamcinolone acetonide (PSTA). Changes in visual acuity with a logarithmic minimal angle of resolution and central foveal thickness measured with optical coherence tomography were analyzed. RESULTS: The mean follow-up was 22.3 weeks. The best improvement in visual acuity and reduction in central foveal thickness was achieved at 4 weeks in all groups but worsened with time until 12 weeks (visual acuity improved from baseline by 0.19, 0.27, and 0.16 and central foveal thickness decreased from baseline by 167.4 mm, 327.6 mm, and 166.4 mm with IVB,IVTA, and PSTA, respectively; P , 0.001). The results with IVTA were better than those with IVB or PSTA, although the difference did not reach statistical significance. Intravitreal bevacizumab provided a significantly better effect in visual acuity gain in Behcet uveitis than in non-Behcet uveitis (P = 0.045). Kaplan–Meier survival analysis showed that the median period of effect were 16 weeks with IVB, 30 weeks with IVTA, and 12 weeks with PSTA.An increase in intraocular pressure (.5 mmHg greater than baseline) was observed in 1 eye(10%) with IVB, 5 eyes (45.5%) with IVTA, and 4 eyes (40%) with PSTA. CONCLUSION: Intravitreal bevacizumab was a well-tolerated and effective supplementary therapy for persistent uveitic cystoid macular edema, especially in Behcet uveitis and for patients with the risk of an increase in intraocular pressure. However, reinjection may be required because of the limited potency and duration of the positive effects of IVB.