 OBJECTIVES: Connective tissue diseases involve characteristic inflammatory lesions in the cardiovascular system, in addition to other systems. The involvement of the cardiovascular system in the course of connective tissue diseases may result in serious morbidity and mortality. Pulse wave velocity which is an indicator of arterial dilatation capacity may predict cardiovascular risk of patients. Pulse wave velocity is inversely proportional to arterial dilatation capacity. Decreased dilatation capacity leads to a reduction in arterial blood pressure and flow dynamics and impairment in coronary perfusion. METHODS: In our study, we examined pulse wave velocity in frequent chronic inflammatory rheumatologic diseases: rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and Behçet's disease. A total of 98 subjects participated in our study including 24 patients with newly diagnosed rheumatoid arthritis (4 males, 20 females; mean age 42.5 ± 11.5 years), 22 patients with newly diagnosed systemic lupus erythematosus (1 male, 21 females; mean age 35.8 ± 11.1 years), 33 patients with newly diagnosed Behçet's disease (26 males, 7 females; mean age 32.7 ± 8.0 years), and 19 healthy subjects in the control group (10 males, 9 females; mean age 36.2 ± 15.0 years). Aorta pulse wave velocity was determined by Complior Colson (Createch Industrie, Garges les Gonesses, France) device which allowed for pulse wave recording and automated measurement. RESULTS: Pulse wave velocity was higher in rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and Behçet's disease groups compared to the control group. When all variables were included in the regression analysis only age was found to affect pulse wave velocity independently. CONCLUSION: Pulse wave velocity was found to be high in chronic inflammatory connective tissue diseases compared to the control group. However, no difference was found between groups. Age was determined as the most important independent variable in the regression analysis.