 PURPOSE: This study examines long-term neuropsychological and psychosocial outcomes of survivors of malignant middle cerebral artery infarction treated via decompressive hemicraniectomy. METHOD: A case series design facilitated a detailed analysis of the outcomes among five participants. Neuropsychological domains assessed included premorbid and current IQ, sustained, selective and divided attention, visual and auditory memory, executive functioning and visuo-spatial ability. Psychosocial domains assessed included self-rated depression, anxiety and quality of life. Participants and their main carer were asked about their retrospective view of surgery. RESULTS: All participants showed neuropsychological impairments in multiple cognitive domains, with preserved ability in others. Effects of laterality of brain function were evident in some domains. Clinically significant depression was evident in two participants. Overall quality of life was within average limits in three of four assessed participants. Four participants retrospectively considered surgery as having been a favourable course of action. CONCLUSION: While neuropsychological impairments are highly likely post-surgery, preserved abilities and social support may serve a protective function against depression and an unacceptably poor quality of life. Results do not support the suggestion that decompressive hemicraniectomy following malignant middle cerebral artery infarction necessarily leads to unacceptable neuropsychological or psychosocial outcomes. [IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATION:• Malignant middle cerebral artery infarction is a life threatening condition.• The neurosurgical procedure, “decompressive hemicraniectomy” has been shown to be life-saving among patients with this condition.• There is little known about the long-term neuropsychological and psychosocial outcomes following decompressive hemicraniectomy for malignant middle cerebral artery infarction.• This study concludes that neuropsychological impairments are highly probable post-surgery. However, preserved abilities and social support may serve a protective function against depression and an unacceptably poor quality of life.]