Nestin is an intermediate filament protein, transiently and abundantly expressed early in embryogenesis, e.g., in neuroepithelial cells, radial glia, germinal matrix cells and vascular cells. In the adult rat brain, nestin is only present in endothelial and select subventricular cells. We tested the hypothesis that after an experimental stroke, nestin expression is induced in glial cells and neurons. We measured the temporal profile of nestin expression after induction of focal cerebral ischemia in adult rats. Brain from rats (n=24) subjected to 2 h of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) and 3 h, 6 h, 12 h, 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, 7 days and 28 days (n=3, per time point) of reperfusion, and control sham operated (n=3) rats were processed for Western blotting to quantify nestin. Another set of brains from rats (n=28), subjected to 2 h of MCAo and 6 h, 12 h, 2 days, 7 days, 14 days, 21 days, and 28 days (n=4, per time point, except n=8 at 2 days) of reperfusion, and control sham operated (n=3) and normal (n=2) rats were processed by single and double labeled immunohistochemistry for cellular identification of nestin expression. By Western blotting, nestin within ischemic tissue increased slightly as early as 6 h, peaked at 7 days, and expression persisted for at least 4 weeks after 2 h of MCAo. By immunohistochemistry, nestin was expressed in astrocytes in the ischemic core from 6 to 12 h after MCAo. Nestin immunoreactivity was present in large numbers of astrocytes, and in scattered oligodendroglia and monocytes/macrophages in both the inner and outer boundary zones to the ischemic core at 1-7 days after MCAo. Nestin expression in glial cells declined at longer durations of survival, although for least 4 weeks after MCAo the nestin immunoreactivity delineated the boundary zone adjacent to the ischemic core. Nestin expression was present in some neurons localized to the outer boundary zone of the ischemic lesion in the cortex and striatum, and in most ependymal cells in the ventricular and subventricular zone (VZ/SVZ) from day 2 after MCAo and onward. The expression of nestin increased throughout the microvasculature in both the ischemic core and the boundary zone in all ischemic rats after 12 h of reperfusion. After stroke, nestin immunoreactivity in glial, neuronal and ependymal cells is suggestive of a protein expression pattern found in developing brain.