It has been previously suggested that the transient ischemic depolarizations (IDs), thought involved in the gradual expansion of ischemic injury in the first hours following middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo), are akin to spreading depression (SD). However, previous studies indicate that the characteristics of these events are heterogeneous (unlike those of SDs). We therefore sought to determine whether different types of IDs exist or not. Using four cortical microelectrodes, we compared the spatial and the temporal characteristics of IDs that occur following intraluminal MCAo in halothane-anesthetized rats to those of electrically induced SDs. An average 4.6+/-3.2 series of events, sequentially affecting the four electrodes, were recorded in 5 h following the induction of ischemia. The distribution of ID duration disclosed two types: short IDs (<7 min, 53% of all events) and long IDs (>7 min; 9% of all events). Most long IDs occurred within the first 30 min and as the initial electrophysiological event. Later on and often restricted to a single or reduced number of recording sites, intermittent IDs were of reduced amplitude or even replaced entirely by suppressed electrocorticographic activity (38% of all events). While the amplitude, duration and spreading characteristics were similar between short IDs and SDs provoked in the cortex of non-ischemic rats, those of long IDs were markedly different. Our results indicate that two types of IDs exist and confirm that most IDs (short ones) are similar in nature to SDs. Long IDs may represent a penumbral anoxic depolarization (AD), reversed by an improvement of perfusion, in the early stages of ischemia. Furthermore, we show that intermittent blockade of depolarization waves occurs and that its incidence increases with time. This blockade may reflect adaptive mechanisms which take place to prevent further depolarizations, the nature of which remains to be determined. The present description of electrophysiological abnormalities might have implications for anti-depolarization therapy in focal cerebral ischemia and to interpret the results of non-invasive techniques which enable the imaging of depolarized areas following stroke.