The aim of the present study was to evaluate the use of the endogenous neuronal compound N-acetylaspartate (NAA) as a marker of neuronal damage after focal cerebral ischemia in mice. After occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCAO) the ischemic cortex was sampled, guided by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining, and the NAA concentration was measured by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). Conventional histology and immunohistological methods using antibodies against neuron-specific enolase (NSE), neurofilaments (NF), synaptophysin, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and carbodiamide-linked NAA and N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG). The level of NAA rapidly declined to 50% and 20% of control levels in infarcted tissue after 6 hours and 24 hours, respectively. No further decrease was observed during the observation period of 1 week. Within the first 6 hours the number of normal-appearing neurons in the infarcted cortical tissue decreased to 70% of control, of which the majority were eosinophilic. After 24 hours almost no normal-appearing neurons were seen. The number of eosinophilic neurons decreased steadily to virtually zero after 7 days. The number of immunopositive cells in the NSE, NF, and synaptophysin staining within the infarct was progressively reduced, and after 3 to 7 days the immunoreactions were confined to discrete granulomatous structures in the center of the infarct, which otherwise was infested with macrophages. This granulomatous material also stained positive for NAA. The number of cells with positive GFAP immunoreactions progressively increased in the circumference of the infarct. They also showed increased immunoreaction against NAA and NSE. The study shows that the level of NAA 7 days after ischemia does not decline to zero but remains at 10% to 20% of control values. The fact NAA is trapped in cell debris and NAA immunoreactivity is observed in the peri-infarct areas restricts its use as a marker of neuronal density.