Mixed efficacy of neuroprotective drugs in clinical trials has led to the emergence of the approach of combination therapy in stroke. The present study was carried out to investigate the effect of the combination of melatonin (potent antioxidant) and meloxicam (preferential inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme) against a middle cerebral artery occlusion model of stroke in rats. Male Wistar rats in the weight range of 250-300 g were used. Rats were anesthetized using chloral hydrate (400 mg/kg i.p) and subjected to 2 h of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Melatonin was administered at a dose of 20 mg/kg i.p. four times: at the time of middle cerebral artery occlusion, 1.5 h after middle cerebral artery occlusion, at the time of reperfusion, and 1 h after reperfusion. Meloxicam (2.5 mg/kg) was administered 4 h after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Motor performance tests (grip test, foot fault test, rotarod performance test, spontaneous locomotor activity), markers of oxidative stress, and triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining were carried out 24 h after middle cerebral artery occlusion. A vehicle-treated group was run in parallel. It was observed that melatonin treatment improved the motor performance and significantly attenuated the levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) as compared with the middle cerebral artery occluded group. Meloxicam treatment at the dose used neither showed significant improvement on the motor performance nor decreased the levels of MDA significantly as compared with the middle cerebral artery occluded group. However, when the combination of the two drugs was used, better protection was observed as was evident by the significant decrease in the percent foot fault errors, the increase in the time spent on the rotarod, and the increase in the six-point neurological score and grip test score. There was also a significant decrease in the levels of MDA in the combination group. The results of the present study demonstrate that enhanced protection is observed with the use of a combination of melatonin plus meloxicam in the middle cerebral artery occlusion model of acute ischemic stroke in rats.