In the present study, we evaluated the time-course of caspase-3 activation, and the evolution of cell death following focal cerebral ischemia produced by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Ischemia-induced active caspase-3 immunoreactivity in the striatum but not the cortex at 3 and 6 h time points post-reperfusion. Furthermore, using a novel approach to visualize enzymatic activity, deltaC-APP, a C-terminal cleavage product of APP generated by caspase-3, was found to immunolocalize to the same areas as active caspase-3. Double-labeling studies demonstrated co-localization of these two proteins at the cellular level. Further double-labeling experiments revealed that active caspase-3 was confined to neuronal cells which were still viable and thus immunoreactive for NeuN. DNA fragmentation, assessed histologically by terminal dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL), was observed in a small number of cells in the striatum as early as 3 h, but only began to appear in the cortex by 6 h. DNA fragmentation was progressive, and by 24 h post-reperfusion, large portions of both the striatum and cortex showed TUNEL positive cells. However, double-labeling of active caspase-3 with TUNEL showed only minimal co-localization at all time-points. Thus, caspase-3 activation is an event that appears to occur prior to DNA fragmentation. As a confirmation of the histological TUNEL data, 24 h ischemia also induced the generation of nucleosome fragments, evidenced by cell death enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Using a novel ischemia-induced substrate cleavage biochemical approach, spectrin P120 fragment, a caspase-specific cleavage product of alpha II spectrin, a cytoskeletal protein, was shown to be elevated by western blotting. Brain concentrations of both nucleosomes and spectrin P120 correlate with the degree of injury previously assessed by triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining and infarct volume calculation. Together, our findings suggest a possible association between caspase-3 activation and ischemic cell death following middle cerebral artery occlusion brain injury.