BACKGROUND: We studied the potential neuroprotective effects of halothane and desflurane, compared with the awake state, on infarct size following 2 h of intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) and 22 h of reperfusion. METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats were anaesthetized with desflurane or halothane, intubated, and mechanically ventilated. Mean arterial pressure (MAP), blood gases, and pH were controlled. Body temperature was maintained at 37.5-38 degrees C. Animals were assigned to one of four groups according to the anaesthetic type (halothane or desflurane) and the duration of anaesthesia: "short-duration", during the preparation only; "long-duration", during both preparation and ischaemia. Twenty-four hours after MCAo, infarcts were visualized by staining with 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride. Two additional groups of rats were subjected to the same protocol as that of long-duration halothane and long-duration desflurane with additional pericranial temperature measurements made. RESULTS: Physiological parameters were comparable between the groups but MAP was higher (P<0.0001) in the short-duration groups. In the short-duration groups, cerebral infarct volumes were not significantly different between anaesthetics (short-duration halothane: 288 (61) mm(3), mean (SD); short-duration desflurane: 269 (71) mm(3), P>0.56). Compared with the awake state (short-duration groups), halothane and desflurane significantly reduced infarct volumes (long-duration halothane: 199 (54) mm(3), P<0.0047 vs short-duration halothane; long-duration desflurane: 121 (55) mm(3), P<0.0001 vs short-duration desflurane). The mean infarct volume in the long-duration desflurane group was significantly lower than that in the long-duration halothane group (P<0.0053). Pericranial temperatures were similar in the desflurane and halothane long-duration groups (P>0.17). CONCLUSIONS: In rats, desflurane-induced neuroprotection against focal cerebral ischaemia was greater than that conferred by halothane.