BACKGROUND: Intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) therapy can be monitored with 2 MHz transcranial Doppler (TCD). This article describes the design of CLOTBUST (combined lysis of thrombus in brain ischemia using transcranial ultrasound and systemic TPA), the first prospective international multicenter randomized clinical trial of noninvasive externally applied ultrasound to enhance systemic thrombolysis in human stroke. SUBJECTS: Patients with acute ischemic stroke eligible for intravenous TPA therapy within 3 hours of symptom onset who have detectable middle cerebral artery occlusion on a prebolus TCD are included in this trial. All patients receive standard 0.9 mg/kg TPA therapy. Patients are randomized (1:1) to either 2 hours of continuous monitoring with TCD or placebo monitoring. FDA-approved portable diagnostic TCD equipment and standard headframes (Marc series, Spencer Technologies, Seattle, WA) are used. Output of TCD units is set at 100% power achievable at depths of insonation that display the worst TIBI flow grade signals. METHODS AND END-POINTS: Acute MCA occlusion on prebolus TCD is defined as thrombolysis in brain ischemia (TIBI) flow grades 0-3. Treating physicians are blinded to randomization assignment, and certified scorers measure stroke severity using the National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS). Safety of continuous TCD monitoring is determined by rates of symptomatic (NIHSS score increase by 4+ points) intracerebral hemorrhage within 72 hours after initial symptom onset. Potential enhancement of TPA therapy will be determined using combined primary end-point of early complete recanalization on TCD (TIBI flow grades 4-5), dramatic recovery (NIHSS < or = 3 points), or decline in the NIHSS > or = 10 points repeatedly measured every 30 minutes within 2 hours after TPA bolus. Other end-points include recovery at 24 hours and 3 months, modified Rankin scores (mRS) are obtained at 90 days, and favorable outcome is determined as NIHSS or mRS scores 0-1. CONCLUSIONS: The aim of phase II CLOTBUST trial is to determine the rates of early complete recanalization and dramatic/early clinical recovery in TPA + TCD and TPA groups. The sample size is set at 126 patients since a medium effect size (.50) is anticipated for TPA + TCD group vs TPA alone to achieve combined primary end-point.