Ischemia is a potent modulator of gene expression. Differential expression of transcription factors after focal ischemia may reflect the potential for neuronal recovery in peri-ischemic regions. Previously, we demonstrated that hypothermia reduces the volume of damage in a model of neonatal focal ischemia. In the present study, immunocytochemistry was used to assess the temporal and spatial profiles of the transcription factors Fos and pCREB under normal and hypothermic conditions in this neonatal model of focal ischemia. At 7 days of age, rat pups underwent a permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) coupled with a temporary 1-h occlusion of the common carotid artery (CCAo). They were maintained at 37 degrees C throughout ischemia and reperfusion (Normothermic), or given 1 h of hypothermic conditions (28 degrees C) either during the occlusion (Intraischemic Hypothermia) or during the second hour of reperfusion (postischemic hypothermia). In normothermic pups, Fos immunoreactivity peaked at early time points (4-8 h post-ischemia) in a narrow band in peri-ischemic regions. By later stages of reperfusion (12-24 h), there was a more widespread induction in peri-ischemic regions including the ipsilateral cortex. In contrast with Fos, the constitutive transcription factor pCREB was reduced in core regions at all time points examined. Both the c-fos induction in peri-ischemic regions and the reduction of pCREB in the core were attenuated by intraischemic hypothermia. Postischemic hypothermia altered the distribution of Fos immunoreactivity without significantly changing the number of Fos- and pCREB-immunoreactive cells compared to normothermic rats. Both intra- and postischemic hypothermia reduced the number of caspase-immunoreactive cells. Thus, focal ischemia in the P7 rat produces different distributions of Fos and pCREB than what has been observed in adult rats subjected to focal ischemia, and expression of these transcription factors can be altered by hypothermia.