We investigated here the effects of alpha-linolenic acid and riluzole, both activators of the 2P-domain K+ channel family TREK/TRAAK, in a model of focal ischemia clinically relevant to stroke, not only assessing neuronal protection, but also long term survival. Moreover, all the drug treatments were initiated post-ischemia. Mice were subjected to transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (1 h) and reperfusion according to the intraluminal filament model. Drugs were injected into the jugular vein according to three protocols: (i) a single dose of 4 mg/kg riluzole or 500 nmol/kg alpha-linolenic acid at different reperfusion time; (ii) a three-day therapy (a single dose of 2 mg/kg riluzole and 250 nmol/kg alpha-linolenic acid given 1-2, 48 and 72 h after reperfusion); (iii) a three-week therapy (a single dose of 2 mg/kg riluzole and 250 nmol/kg alpha-linolenic acid given once a week during three weeks after reperfusion. A combined treatment with 2mg/kg riluzole+250 nmol/kg alpha-linolenic acid injected 2 h after reperfusion was also tested. A single dose of riluzole (4 mg/kg) or alpha-linolenic acid (500 nmol/kg) injected up to 3 h after reperfusion reduced drastically the stroke volume by 75% and 86%, respectively. Neurological deficits 24 h after ischemia were significantly improved by alpha-linolenic acid500 or riluzole4 with a neurological score of 1.8 as compared with 2.5 observed in vehicle-treated mice. Alpha-linolenic acid- and riluzole treatment were associated with a reduction in cytopathological features of cell injury, including DNA fragmentation and Bax expression in the cortex and the caudate putamen. With regard to the survival rate at 30 days, the best protections were obtained with the alpha-linolenic acid-injection in the three-week therapy as well as with a single dose of the combined treatment (2 mg/kg riluzole+250 nmol/kg alpha-linolenic acid). Palmitic acid, a saturated fatty acid that does not activate the 2P-domain K-channel TREK/TRAAK family, did not provide any neuroprotection. Taken together, these data suggest that the TREK/TRAAK K-channel family may be a promising target for neuroprotection, and that riluzole and alpha-linolenic acid could be of therapeutic value against focal ischemia/reperfusion injury to the brain.