Pericytes are essential components of the blood-brain barrier together with endothelial cells and astrocytes. Any disturbance of brain perfusion may result in blood-brain barrier dysfunction due to pericyte migration from the microvascular wall. The neuroprotective influence of hypothermia on ischemic brain injury has been clearly shown in models of both global and focal ischemia. Leakage of plasma proteins contributes to the extension of neuronal injury and hypothermia has a neuroprotective influence during the ischemic insult. This line of thinking impelled us to investigate the possible role of the pericytes in the occurrence of hypothermic protection during cerebral ischemia. In this study, we examined at the ultrastructural level the effect of moderate hypothermia on microvascular pericyte responses using a rat model of permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. Twenty rats were divided into four groups. Middle cerebral artery occlusion was performed in all rats except the control group (first group), which was used to determine the pericyte morphology under normal conditions. In the second group, pericyte response to irreversible ischemia under normothermic conditions was examined at the end of the first hour. In the third group, pericyte response to hypoxia was examined under normothermic conditions three hours after ischemia. In the fourth group, temporalis muscle temperature was maintained at 27-29 degrees C for 1h after middle cerebral artery occlusion and pericyte response was then examined at the ultrastructural level. In ischemic normothermic conditions at the end of the first hour (Group 2), a separation was observed between pericytes and the basement membrane and this was interpreted as pericyte migration from the microvascular wall. In ischemic normothermic conditions at the end of the third hour (Group 3), basement membrane disorganization and increased space between the basement membranes were seen in addition to the differentiation of second group. In ischemic hypothermic conditions at the end of the first hour (Group 4), pericyte separation or migration from basement membrane were not seen and the blood-brain barrier remained firm. These findings were interpreted by the authors as a possible relationship between pericyte behavior and neural protection during hypothermia. We suggest that hypothermia may delay the pericyte response but not necessarily attenuate it, and should be associated with hypothermic protection.