 AIM: To observe the effect of nonselective nitro oxide synthase inhibitor N(G)-nitro-L-arginine(L-NA) on mitochondria injury in focal cerebral ischemia rats. METHODS: The rats were randomly devided into sham, ischemia and L-NA treatment group. The model of focal cerebral ischemia was prepared with thread embolism in rats. L-NA was administrated respectively at 2 h, 6 h, 12 h after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Rats were killed and the mitochondria of cerebral tissue were isolated by differential centrifugation after L-NA treatment for 3 days. The swelling and the activity of mitochondria, and the activities of ATPase, SOD, GSH-Px in mitochondria and the contents of NO, MDA in mitochondria were measured. Ultrastructure changes of neuronal mitochondria were examined by electronic microscope in ischemia and L-NA treatment group. RESULTS: The swelling of mitochondria was markedly increased and the activity of mitochondria was decreased, and the contents of mitochondria NO and MDA were markedly increased, the activity of ATPase, SOD and GSH-Px in mitochondria were decreased significantly after MCAO. Compared with ischemia group, the contents of NO were decreased after ischemia 2h, 6h, 12h administered by L-NA, and the swelling of mitochondria was decreased and the activity of mitochondria was increased, and the activities of ATPase, SOD, GSH-Px in mitochondria were enhanced and the contents of MDA in mitochondria were decreased after ischemia 12 h administered by L-NA. The neuronal cytoplasm and the mitochondria swelled, the cristae were disrupted, dissolved or disappeared in MCAO rats. Administration of L-NA could reduce these changes induced by cerebral ischemia in rats. CONCLUSION: It could be concluded that L-NA could beneficially inhibit NO production. But it could't protect brain against damage in ischemia acute stage. It could improve mitochondria energy pump, ameliorate oxidative injury and increase the activities of mitochondria during postischemia, and then could effectively protect brain against damage induced by focal cerebral ischemia.