 BACKGROUND: Recently, we reported a neuroprotective effect for Hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha) ethanolic extract in middle cerebral artery occlusion-(MCAO) induced stroke in rats. The present study sheds more light on the extract's mechanism of neuroprotection, especially its immunomodulatory effect. METHODS: After 15 days of treatment with Hawthorn extract [100 mg/kg, pretreatment (oral)], male Sprague Dawley rats underwent transient MCAO for 75 mins followed by reperfusion (either 3 or 24 hrs). We measured pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6), ICAM-1, IL-10 and pSTAT-3 expression in the brain by appropriate methods. We also looked at the cytotoxic T cell sub-population among leukocytes (FACS) and inflammatory cell activation and recruitment in brain (using a myeloperoxidase activity assay) after ischemia and reperfusion (I/R). Apoptosis (TUNEL), and Bcl-xL- and Foxp3- (T(reg) marker) positive cells in the ipsilateral hemisphere of the brain were analyzed separately using immunofluorescence. RESULTS: Our results indicate that occlusion followed by 3 hrs of reperfusion increased pro-inflammatory cytokine and ICAM-1 gene expressions in the ipsilateral hemisphere, and that Hawthorn pre-treatment significantly (p ≤ 0.01) lowered these levels. Furthermore, such pre-treatment was able to increase IL-10 levels and Foxp3-positive cells in brain after 24 hrs of reperfusion. The increase in cytotoxic T cell population in vehicle rats after 24 hrs of reperfusion was decreased by at least 40% with Hawthorn pretreatment. In addition, there was a decrease in inflammatory cell activation and infiltration in pretreated brain. Hawthorn pretreatment elevated pSTAT-3 levels in brain after I/R. We also observed an increase in Bcl-xL-positive cells, which in turn may have influenced the reduction in TUNEL-positive cells compared to vehicle-treated brain. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, Hawthorn extract helped alleviate pro-inflammatory immune responses associated with I/R-induced injury, boosted IL-10 levels, and increased Foxp3-positive T(regs) in the brain, which may have aided in suppression of activated inflammatory cells. Such treatment also minimizes apoptotic cell death by influencing STAT-3 phosphorylation and Bcl-xL expression in the brain. Taken together, the immunomodulatory effect of Hawthorn extract may play a critical role in the neuroprotection observed in this MCAO-induced stroke model.