BACKGROUND Few data are available on the relationship between fluid-attenuated inversion recovery vascular hyperintensities and proximal middle cerebral artery occlusion prognosis. OBJECTIVES To assess a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery vascular hyperintensities score (FVHS) and explore its relationship with recanalization status and clinical outcomes after intravenous thrombolysis. DESIGN Retrospective study. SETTING Stroke unit in a university hospital. PATIENTS Consecutive patients with proximal middle cerebral artery occlusion, thrombolysed within 6 hours, were selected from our prospective database. The FVHS (range, 0-10; divided into low, medium, and high thirds) was quantified on the magnetic resonance image obtained at admission. Recanalization rates, infarction size (Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score applied to diffusion-weighted imaging [ASPECTS-DWI]), and 3-month functional outcomes (modified Rankin Scale score) were determined. Poor outcomes and large infarctions were defined as a modified Rankin Scale score higher than 2 and an ASPECTS-DWI score of 5 or lower, respectively. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES Interaction among FVHS, recanalization status, and outcomes. RESULTS Thirty-four patients had a low FVHS (≤4), 32 had a medium FVHS (5 or 6), and 39 had a high FVHS (≥7). The rate of poor functional outcome (modified Rankin Scale score &gt;2) was higher for the group with low FVHSs than those with medium FVHSs and high FVHSs (82.3% vs 43.7% and 43.5%, respectively; P &lt; .001). The rate of 24-hour large infarctions (ASPECTS-DWI score ≤5) was higher for those with low FVHSs than those with medium and high FVHSs (88.2% vs 56.2% and 51.3%, respectively; P = .002). The recanalization rate was not associated with FVHS. Multivariate analysis retained low FVHS as an independent early predictor of poor clinical outcome (odds ratio = 9.91; 95% CI, 2.01-48.93; P = .004) and large infarction (odds ratio = 6.99; 95% CI, 1.78-27.46; P = .005). Low FVHS remained associated with poor outcomes regardless of recanalization status. Early recanalization in patients with a low FVHS decreased the poor functional outcome rate from 100% to 64.7% (P = .02). CONCLUSIONS The FVHS is an early independent prognostic marker for patients with proximal middle cerebral artery occlusion. Synergy between FVHS and recanalization status appears to be a critical determinant of final outcomes, supporting intensive reperfusion treatment for patients with a low FVHS.