 UNLABELLED: OBJECTIVE To observe the changing laws of the protein expression of N-methyl D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) in rat hippocampal subfields following focal ischemia/reperfusion injury, and to study the effects of sodium tanshinone B (STB) on it, thus exploring the possible mechanism of STB for treating cerebral ischemia. METHODS: The rat model of focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury was established using middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) by reversibly inserting a nylon thread. The Wistar rats were randomly divided into the sham-operation group, the I/R model group, and the low, middle, and high dose STB groups. The neural functional disturbance was scored referring to the 5-grade Zea Longa EL standard. The protein expression of NMDAR1 in the ischemic side was detected using immunohistochemical assay. RESULTS: There was statistical difference in the scores of the neural functional disturbance in the middle and high dose STB groups when compared with the model group (P < 0.01). Results of the immunohistochemical assay showed the expression of NMDAR1 in CA1 region was obviously higher in the I/R model group, the low and middle dose STB groups than in the sham-operation group (P < 0.01). The expression of NMDAR1 in CA1 region was obviously lower in the high dose STB group than in the I/R model group (P < 0.01), the low (P < 0.01) and middle dose STB groups (P < 0.05). The expression of NMDAR1 in CA3 region was obviously higher in the low dose STB group and the I/R model group than in the sham-operation group, the middle and high dose STB groups (P < 0.01). The expression of NMDAR1 in CA3 region was obviously higher in the high and middle dose STB groups than in the sham-operation group (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: STB could promote the recovery of neural functions in cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury rats. STB fought against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury by lowering excitable neurotransmitter glumatic acid and reducing the protein expression of NMDAR1.