Focal cerebral ischemia in the rat was induced by occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery. The temporal evolution of regional energy metabolism was studied over the 14 days consequent to the induction of ischemia in the frontal, cingulate, parietal, and occipital cortices as well as in the striatum. Regional concentrations of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), phosphocreatine, and lactate and, in addition, glucose and the cerebral/plasma glucose ratio (C/P) were measured in the hemispheres both ipsilateral and contralateral to the occlusion. Two hours after middle cerebral artery occlusion, the biochemical changes were severe in the striatum and moderate in cortical regions. Later on (at 24 and 48 h), an overall aggravated metabolic status was noted while lactate declined and glucose markedly increased. These latter biochemical changes likely indicate a marked inhibition of the rate of glucose utilization. At 48 h, the energy reserves (ATP, phosphocreatine) of parietal cortex no longer equaled those of other cortical regions, but abruptly fell to the levels found in the striatum without any increase in lactate level. Finally, at 7 and 14 days, the levels of the various metabolites in most cortical regions returned toward control values, although signs of a depressed glucose metabolism remained. However, in both striatum and parietal cortex, ATP and phosphocreatine concentrations, although higher than those observed at 48 h, remained significantly decreased. Our present biochemical study permits the classification of these selected brain regions into three categories. First there are those that are outside the area of infarction: the frontal, cingulate, and occipital cortices. These regions show little temporal evolution of brain energy metabolism but, notwithstanding, they are regions in which glucose use would appear to be greatly depressed. Second is a region considered to be the focus of infarction: the striatum. The caudate-putamen is a region with early and profound metabolic disturbances with no final restitution. Last is the region of metabolic penumbra--the parietal cortex, in which there is a time-related exacerbation of the consequences of middle cerebral occlusion in the rat.