BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The present study was performed to examine the potential of diffusion-weighted (DW) imaging and dynamic first-passage bolus tracking of susceptibility contrast agents (perfusion imaging) for early in vivo evaluation of the effects of treatment with the free radical scavenger U74389G in a rat model of temporary focal ischemia. METHODS: After 45 minutes of middle cerebral artery occlusion, the treatment group (n = 9) received an infusion of U74389G, and the control group (n = 9) received the identical volume of the vehicle. Reperfusion was instituted in both groups after 120 minutes of middle cerebral artery occlusion. The DW images were collected during middle cerebral artery occlusion and reperfusion and were compared with histologically assessed areas of tissue injury after 2 hours of reperfusion. The dynamic perfusion series were processed on a pixel-to-pixel basis to produce parametric maps reflecting the maximum reduction in the signal obtained during the first passage of the contrast agent and the time delay between the arrival of the bolus and the point of maximum contrast-agent effect. RESULTS: The area of ischemic injury, as assessed from the DW imaging at 60 minutes of reperfusion, was significantly smaller in the treatment group: 9 +/- 8% of ipsilateral hemisphere compared with 19 +/- 8% in the control group. The histological examination after 2 hours of reperfusion demonstrated an area of ischemic injury of 10 +/- 8% for the treatment group compared to 25 +/- 10% in the control group. In the treatment group, the perfusion imaging showed a reduction in time delay to maximum effect of the contrast agent in the ischemic hemisphere compared with the control group. CONCLUSIONS: The DW imaging during early reperfusion showed a protective effect of postocclusion treatment with the free radical scavenger U74389G. The improvement of time delay to maximum effect of the contrast agent observed in the perfusion imaging of the treatment group may reflect an improvement in the collateral flow to the ischemic tissue.