BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: One explanation for inconclusive results with calcium channel blockers in human acute stroke trials may be incomplete information about the time course of calcium-mediated ischemic neuronal injury. This study explores the temporal relation between duration of focal ischemia and the functional activity of increased intracellular calcium as measured by calcium-calmodulin binding. METHODS: Calcium-calmodulin binding, determined by immunohistochemical assay of free calmodulin, was measured in 60 male spontaneously hypertensive rats after 2 minutes and after 1, 2, 4, and 24 hours of permanent tandem common carotid and middle cerebral artery occlusion, and after 1 and 2 hours of reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion followed by 1 and 22 hours of reperfusion, respectively. Light microscopic histological damage was measured after 1 hour of occlusion with 23 hours of reperfusion and after 24 hours of occlusion. RESULTS: Significant loss of calmodulin staining in the core of the infarction was noted by 1 hour and became maximal after 4 hours of ischemia. No reversal of calmodulin staining loss was noted after reperfusion following 1 and 2 hours of ischemia. Cortical necrosis seen by light microscopy correlated well with the area of maximal calcium-calmodulin binding. The border zone area, represented by a mild loss of calmodulin staining surrounding the central core of maximal binding, gradually decreased in size and became incorporated into the central core after 4 hours of ischemia; it may represent an area of reversible ischemia. CONCLUSIONS: Calcium-calmodulin binding correlates with duration of focal ischemia, and histological neuronal necrosis corresponds to the cortical areas displaying a significant loss of calmodulin staining. Inasmuch as loss of calmodulin staining represents a marker for calcium-mediated activity after ischemia, it suggests a window of opportunity within 4 hours after acute stroke for therapeutic intervention with calcium antagonists.