In previous studies, we have used histological methods to characterize cellular changes, and validated the use of the myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity assay to quantitate increased neutrophil infiltration in ischemic stroke. We also identified increased leukotriene B4 (LTB4) binding sites as a potential marker for neutrophil infiltration into focal ischemic tissue. However, these studies were conducted at only one time-point, 24 h after ischemia. In the present study, we examined the full time-course of MPO activity and LTB4 receptor binding following middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) made permanently (PMCAO) or transiently (160 min followed by reperfusion; TMCAO) in spontaneously hypertensive rats, and compared the results to previously characterized histologic changes in these models. Ischemic and contralateral (control) cortical tissue samples were assayed for MPO (U/g wet wt) and [3H]LTB4 receptor binding (fmol/mg protein). Following PMCAO, MPO activity significantly increased as early as 12 h and continued to increase over the next 5 d (p < 0.05). Following TMCAO, MPO activity was significantly elevated already after only 6 h of reperfusion and also continued to increase over the next 5 d of reperfusion (p < 0.05). LTB4 receptor binding and MPO activity were highly correlated during periods when both measures increased together (i.e., 0.5-5 d; p <0.01). However, by 15 d post-MCAO, LTB4 receptor binding remained elevated after MPO activity levels had returned to normal. This persistent LTB4 binding was associated with the significant gliosis that was characterized previously to persist in these models. The time-course of increased MPO activity and initially increased LTB4 binding post-MCAO correspond very well to our previous histological data that characterized the time-course for leukocyte infiltration under these conditions. Therefore, the increased MPO activity over time was associated with initial neutrophil and later mononuclear cell infiltration into ischemic tissue in these models. In addition, the present studies utilized histochemical analysis to demonstrate peroxidase activity in macrophages within the cerebral infarct following MCAO, thus validating that MPO activity originates from the later infiltrating mononuclear cells in addition to the early infiltrating neutrophils that had been previously characterized in the same manner. TMCAO produces a significantly larger and earlier increase in ischemic cortex MPO activity and a similar later increase in MPO activity compared to PMCAO treatment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)