Induction of NADPH-diaphorase (NDP) following ischemic infarction was studied by means of histochemistry in the rat cerebral cortex 1,2,7, and 14 days after distal occlusion of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA). The fine structure of cells in the penumbra region of the necrotic center was also investigated. MCA distal occlusion resulted in ischemic lesion of the frontoparietal cortex of variable extent; NDP induction was detected in neurons, astrocytes, macrophages, and endothelial cells, with regional specificity and a temporal gradient. One, two, and seven days after MCA occlusion, weak NDP positivity was consistently induced in some pyramidal neurons in cortical areas neighboring the necrotic area; NDP induction was also seen in pyramidal neurons of the ipsilateral anterior cingulate and infralimbic cortices and in the tenia tecta. In addition, numerous NDP-positive pyramidal neurons were detected in the contralateral frontoparietal cortex after relatively large ischemic lesions. Two weeks after MCA occlusion, NDP induction in neurons was only evident in the deep cortical layers near the lesion. NDP histochemistry combined with glial fibrillary acidic protein immunofluorescence, performed 7 days after MCA occlusion, indicated that the astrocytes at the periphery of the necrotic area were hypertrophic and some of them were also NDP-positive. One and two days after MCA occlusion, numerous macrophages displaying NDP positivity of variable intensity were seen at the periphery of the necrotic area and in the external capsule of the ischemic cerebral hemisphere. Many endothelial cells in the cortex and subcortical white matter were consistently NDP-positive in all rats. Electron microscopic studies indicated that the area adjacent to the necrotic center was composed of fibrous astrocytes, with the morphological characteristics of proliferation, and numerous lysosome-filled macrophages. Altogether the present results suggest that focal cerebral ischemia may induce in different cell types nitric oxide synthase, which is equivalent to NDP in fixed tissue. The induction of nitric oxide synthase may be related to (1) blood-flow regulation at relatively early postischemic stages, which may decline when collateral circulation is established, and/or (2) cytotoxic or neuroprotective mechanisms.