Inhibitors of apoptosis and of excitotoxic cell death reduce brain damage after transient and permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. We compared the neuroprotective effects of two caspase family inhibitors with the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist (+)-MK-801 hydrogen maleate (MK-801) in a newly characterized cycloheximide-sensitive murine model of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (30 minutes) in which apoptotic cell death is prominent. Ischemic infarction, undetected by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining at 24-hour reperfusion, featured prominently in the striatum at 72 hours and 7 days on hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections. Markers of apoptosis, such as oligonucleosomal DNA damage (laddering) and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells first appeared at 24 hours and increased significantly at 72 hours and 7 days after reperfusion. The TUNEL-labeled cells were mostly neurons and stained negative for glial (GFAP, glial fibrillary acid protein) and leukocyte specific markers (CD-45). The caspase inhibitors, N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethyl ketone (z-VAD.FMK; 120 ng intracerebroventricularly) or N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-fluoromethyl ketone (z-DEVD.FMK; 480 ng intracerebroventricularly) decreased infarct size and neurologic deficits when administered 6 hours after reperfusion. The extent of protection was greater than in models of more prolonged ischemia or after permanent occlusion, and the therapeutic window was extended from 0 to 1 hours after 2-hour middle cerebral artery occlusion to at least 6 hours after brief ischemia. Also, z-VAD.FMK and z-DEVD.FMK treatment decreased oligonucleosomal DNA damage (DNA laddering) as assessed by quantitative autoradiography after gel electrophoresis. By contrast, MK-801 protected brain tissue only when given before ischemia (3 mg/kg intraperitoneally), but not at 3 or 6 hours after reperfusion. Despite a decrease in infarct size after MK-801 pretreatment, the amount of DNA laddering did not decrease 72 hours after reperfusion, thereby suggesting a mechanism distinct from inhibition of apoptosis. Hence, 30 minutes of reversible ischemia augments apoptotic cell death, which can be attenuated by delayed z-VAD.FMK and z-DEVD.FMK administration with preservation of neurologic function. By contrast, the therapeutic window for MK-801 does not extend beyond the time of occlusion, probably because its primary mechanism of action does not block the development of apoptotic cell death.