The long-term (< or = six months) functional consequences of permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion were studied with in vitro extra- and intracellular recording techniques in adult mouse neocortical slices. After survival times of one to three days, 28 days and six months, intracellular recordings from layers II/III pyramidal cells in the vicinity of the infarct did not reveal any statistically significant changes in the intrinsic membrane properties when compared to age-matched control animals. However, a pronounced hyperexcitability could be observed upon orthodromic synaptic stimulation in neocortical slices obtained from mice 28 days after induction of ischemia. Low-intensity electrical stimulation of the afferents elicited particularly in this group epileptiform extracellular field potential responses and intracellular excitatory postsynaptic potentials, that were longer in duration as compared to the controls. When the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated excitatory postsynaptic potential was pharmacologically isolated in a bathing solution containing 0.1 mM Mg2+ and 10 microM 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione, the synaptic responses were longer and larger in the ischemic cortex as compared to the controls. Higher stimulus intensities evoked in normal medium a biphasic inhibitory postsynaptic potential, that contained in the 28 days post-ischemia group a prominent amino-phosphonovaleric acid-sensitive component, indicating a strong concurrent activation of a N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated excitatory postsynaptic potential. This pronounced co-activation could only be observed in the 28 days ischemic group, and neither after one to three days or six months post-ischemia nor in the controls. The quantitative analysis of the efficiency of stimulus- evoked inhibitory postsynaptic potentials recorded in amino-phosphono-valeric acid revealed a reduction of GABA-mediated inhibition in ischemic cortex. Although this reduction in intracortical inhibition may already contribute to an augmentation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated excitation, our results do also indicate that the function of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors is transiently enhanced in the ischemic cortex. This transient hyperexcitability does not only cause cellular dysfunction in the vicinity of the infarct, but may also contribute to neuronal damage due to excitotoxicity.