Two hundred and fifty-one patients with a persistent foramen ovale (PFO), mean age 43.3 +/- 12.4 years, underwent catheter closure between 6/1995 and 6/2001. One hundred and forty-one had an ischemic stroke, 99 a transient ischemic attack (TIA) or prolonged reversible ischemic neurologic deficit, 5 peripheral arterial embolism, 4 suffered from decompression sickness after diving and 2 had transient global amnesia. Fifty-nine of them had multiple events in spite of antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy. The patients received five different devices: 13 Rashkind Occluders, 20 Amplatzer septal Occluders, 109 Amplatzer PFO-Occluders, 73 CardioSEAL and 36 STAR-Flex devices. Time of fluoroscopy was 8.3 +/- 4.5 min. In three patients a device embolized and had to be removed from the groin vessels. We saw five inguinal or retroperitoneal venous hematomas with the need for operation in one patient. One early and one late perforation of the left atrium caused by a guide wire and a left-atrial disc, respectively, also needed surgery. Fourteen patients had documented late arrhythmias. Six patients with atrial fibrillation needed drugs or cardioversion while the other patients with runs of supraventricular tachycardia, atrial flutter and multiple extrasystoles needed no therapy. On transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 6 months after implantation we found four significant residual leaks. These patients had the defect closed with a second device. In addition a secundum atrial septal defect (ASD) was closed in 17 patients (mean age 38 +/- 10.5 years) with Amplatzer septal Occluders (12) and CardioSEAL devices (5). These patients had experienced eight strokes and nine TIAs, 3 of them had had multiple events. Two of these patients had a significant residual defect and one had atrial flutter following the procedure. Two hundred and two PFO-patients and 12 ASD patients were followed for 6-62 (24.6 +/- 14.2) months; 2 died due to a traffic accident and a myocardial infarction, respectively. Four patients had another neurologic event following PFO-closure. We now overlook 210 patients with 348.6 symptom-free patient years and have a 1-year recurrence rate of neurologic events of 1.9%. Catheter closure of the PFO and atrial septal defect is a simple, effective and quick method which ensures a high closure rate, avoids life-long anticoagulation and has a low recurrence rate of neurologic events.