 OBJECTIVE: To present the case of a collegiate pitcher with type I diabetes mellitus who developed transient global amnesia and to characterize the acute onset of symptoms and clinical diagnosis of this rarely reported neurologic condition in the student-athlete population. BACKGROUND: A 21-year-old collegiate pitcher with type I diabetes mellitus was found by his roommate to have acute-onset memory loss. The athletic trainer identified normal blood glucose levels and normal vital signs but profound amnesia. The patient was evaluated by his team physician and referred to the local emergency department for acute-onset memory disturbance. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS: Hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis, adverse drug reaction, infectious disease, transient epileptic amnesia, transient ischemic attack, acute confusional state, complex partial seizure, psychogenic amnesia, migraine, intracerebral hemorrhage, traumatic brain injury, tumor, and transient global amnesia. TREATMENT: Diagnostic studies included computed tomography of the head, urine and serum toxicology, urinalysis, blood glucose level, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen level, creatinine level, complete blood count, and electroencephalography. The patient was admitted overnight to the neurology service. The next morning, electroencephalography was repeated, and magnetic resonance imaging of the head with contrast was performed. The patient was discharged with the diagnosis of transient global amnesia. UNIQUENESS: Transient global amnesia is considered a benign condition characterized by an acute episode of memory disturbance involving the inability to form new memories and recall recent events. It is rare in young people, with only 3 case reports involving young athletes published in the literature. CONCLUSIONS: Transient global amnesia is a rarely diagnosed neurologic disturbance that may present acutely in student-athletes, although most reported cases affect older adults. Unfamiliarity with the symptoms may cause anxiety for the athlete and bystanders. Transient global amnesia does not result in long-term neurologic deficit, and neurologic function will return to baseline.