 BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is generally a disease of the older population. The prognosis and clinicopathologic features of CRC in the young, compared with those in older patients, continue to be debated. The aim of this study was to compare the survival, clinicopathologic features, and tumor markers of CRC in patients aged 40 y or younger and older patients. METHODS: A total of 230 patients with CRC of stage I-III were assessed retrospectively, with an endpoint of recurrence or metastasis after curative operation. The markers CEA, MMP-2, and p27(kip1) were studied by immunohistochemistry in all patients. RESULTS: The young group comprised 28 (12.2%) patients aged 40 y or younger with a median age of 36 y. The remaining 202 patients (87.8%) comprised the old group, with a median age of 61 y. There were no statistical differences in gender distribution, tumor sites, tumor size, or gross type between the young and old groups. The young group had a higher incidence of mucinous adenocarcinoma (17.9%) than the old group (6.4%) (P = 0.035). The distribution of stage, differentiation grade, and extent of venous invasion were similar. The median disease-free survival time was 60 mo for the young group and 49 mo for the old. Univariate analysis revealed that this difference was not significant (P = 0.1158). Multivariate Cox regression analysis also demonstrated that the age of the patient was not an independent factor for the prognosis of CRC. There were no statistical differences between the young and old groups in the expression of CEA, MMP-2, or p27(kip1). CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicated that there was a subtle difference in the incidence of mucinous adenocarcinoma between young and old patients with CRC. However, stage I-III young patients had a similar disease-free survival period as the older patients. Other clinicopathologic characteristics, and tumor markers such as CEA, MMP-2, and p27(kip1), were also similar between young and old CRC patients.