Infectious complications resulting from resection of colorectal cancer (CRC) elevates the risk of cancer recurrence and metastasis, but the reason for this risk relationship is unknown. Defining the mechanisms responsible may offer opportunities to improve outcomes in a majority of patients whose tumors are resected as part of their therapy. The complex formed between Toll receptor TLR4 and myeloid differentiation factor MD2 defines a major cell surface receptor for lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a gram-negative bacterial antigen that has been implicated in infectious complications after CRC resection. As the TLR4/MD2 complex is expressed on CRC cells, we hypothesized that LPS may promote liver metastasis in CRC by stimulating TLR4 signaling. In support of this hypothesis, we report here that LPS enhances liver metastasis of human CRC cells that express TLR4/MD2 after intrasplenic graft of immunocompromised nude mice. Compared with TLR4 nonexpressing, nonmetastatic CRC cells, we observed increased in vitro adherence to different extracellular matrices and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Furthermore, we observed an increased likelihood of in vivo capture within hepatic sinusoids after LPS treatment. No differences were apparent in phosphorylation of p38 and MAPK isoforms, but in metastatic CRC cells expressing surface TLR4 treatment with LPS increased Ser473 phosphorylation of AKT kinase. We showed that enhanced adherence elicited by LPS in these cells could be blocked at three different levels, using Eritoran (TLR4 small molecule antagonist), PI-103 (PI3K inhibitor), or anti-β1 integrin blocking antibodies. Taken together, the results indicate that stimulation of the TLR4/MD2 complex by LPS activates PI3K/AKT signaling and promotes downstream β1 integrin function, thereby increasing the adhesiveness and metastatic capacity of CRC cells. Our findings suggest that inhibiting LPS-induced TLR4 signaling could improve therapeutic outcomes by preventing cancer metastasis during the perioperative period of CRC resection.