 AIM: To investigate the current status of peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC) management, as well as the usage of cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) in mainland China. METHODS: A potentially curative therapeutic strategy for selecting patients with PC, known as "Techniques", consists of CRS in combination with HIPEC. A systemic search of published works and clinical trials was performed. Additional papers were retrieved by cross-checking references and obtaining information from Chinese oncologists and relevant conferences. One hundred and one papers and one registered clinical trial on HIPEC were included. RESULTS: A literature review identified 86 hospitals in 25 out of all 31 areas of mainland China that perform HIPEC. The earliest report included in our survey was published in 1993. Different approaches to HIPEC have been utilized, i.e. palliative, prophylactic, and possibly curative treatment. Only one center has consistently performed HIPEC according to the "Sugarbaker Protocol", which involves evaluating the extent of PC with peritoneal cancer index and the results of CRS with the completeness of cytoreduction. Positive preliminary results were reported: 7 of 21 patients with PC survived, free of tumors, during an 8-43-mo follow-up period. Hyperthermic strategies that include HIPEC have been practiced for a long time in mainland China, whereas the "Sugarbaker Protocol/Techniques" has been only rarely implemented in China. The Peritoneal Surface Oncology Group International hosts a biannual workshop with the intent to train more specialists in this field and provide support for the construction of quality treatment centers, especially in developing countries like China, whose population is huge and has a dramatically increased incidence of cancer. CONCLUSION: To popularize Sugarbaker Protocol/Techniques in mainland China in PC management arising from gastric cancer or colorectal cancer will be the responsibility of the upcoming Chinese Peritoneal Surface Oncology Group.