 BACKGROUND: Surgical procedures are related to the activation of the inflammatory reaction. This is called surgical stress. It is believed that diminished surgical trauma reduces surgical stress. The laparoscopic approach reduces trauma, but the systemic immune responses are still invariably activated. Cytokines and C-reactive protein (CRP) are the main markers in the study of inflammatory or stress response. α-Defensins play an important role in host defense, acting early in phagocytosis. α-Defensins, as early markers-earlier than cytokines-of the inflammatory response, have been used, together with high-sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), to determine the inflammatory response in laparoscopic and open colectomy for cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 40 patients with colorectal cancer were randomized to two groups: group A (n = 20), open colectomy; group B (n = 20), laparoscopic colectomy. One hour preoperatively an epidural catheter was placed in all patients and rupivacaine was administered perioperatively and again 48 h postoperatively. Blood samples were taken for calculating α-defensins, IL-6, and hs-CRP levels preoperatively, 5 min after division of the colon (group A), or 5 min after deflation of pneumoperitoneum (group B), 6 h and 24 h postoperatively. RESULTS: The mean operative time was 115 min for group A and 142 min for group B (p < 0.05). The mean blood loss was 240 ml and 105 ml, respectively (p < 0.001). The mean hospital stay was 8 days and 5 days, respectively (p < 0.05). α-Defensin levels were statistically significantly lower in group B than in group A, 5 min and 24 h postoperatively (p < 0.002 and p < 0.007, respectively). The IL-6 levels were statistically significantly lower in group B than in group A, 6 h and 24 h postoperatively (p < 0.0001 at both time intervals), whereas the levels of hs-CRP were significantly lower in group B than in group A 24 h postoperatively (p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: The present study confirms the results of previous studies, that the inflammatory immune response and surgical stress are significantly less after laparoscopic colectomy versus open colectomy for colorectal cancer. More investigation is needed to study if surgical stress has any influence on survival of these patients.