This article is the first to show that loss of connexin43 (Cx43) expression in colorectal tumors is correlated with significantly shorter relapse-free and overall survival. Cx43 was further found to negatively regulate growth of colon cancer cells, in part by enhancing apoptosis. In addition, Cx43 was found to colocalize with β-catenin and reduce Wnt signaling. The study represents the first evidence that Cx43 acts as a colorectal cancer tumor suppressor and that loss of Cx43 expression during colorectal cancer development is associated with reduced patient survival. The study has important implications for the assessment of Cx43 as a prognostic marker and target in colorectal cancer prevention and therapy. Gap junctions consist of intercellular channels that permit direct transfer of ions and small molecules between adjacent cells. The gap junction channel protein Cx43 plays important roles in cell growth control and differentiation and is frequently dysregulated in human cancers. However, the functional importance and clinical relevance of Cx43 in cancer development has remained elusive. Here, we show that Cx43 is downregulated or aberrantly localized in colon cancer cell lines and colorectal carcinomas, which is associated with loss of gap junction intercellular communication. The in situ protein expression of Cx43 was analyzed in colorectal tumors in a cohort of 674 patients and related to established clinicopathological variables and survival. A subgroup of the patients had weak or no expression of Cx43 in tumors. Loss of Cx43 expression was significantly correlated with shorter relapse-free and overall survival. Loss of Cx43 further identified a high-risk subgroup among stage I and stage II patients with reduced relapse-free and overall survival. Ectopic expression of Cx43 in the colon cancer cell line HT29 was associated with reduced growth in monolayer and soft agar cultures and in tumor xenografts. Cx43 was found to colocalize with β-catenin and negatively regulate the Wnt signaling pathway, and expression of Cx43 was associated with increased levels of apoptosis. Altogether, these data indicate that Cx43 is a colorectal cancer tumor suppressor protein that predicts clinical outcome.