 BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer is the most common cancer in Europe. Early diagnosis and treatment gives the patient a chance for complete recovery. Screening colonoscopies in the symptom-free patients are currently performed on a wide scale. The examinations are performed under local anesthesia which does not eliminate all discomfort and pain related to the examination. The aim of this study was to evaluate magnetic scope navigation in screening endoscopic examinations performed to detect early-stage colorectal cancer. METHODS: The study group consisted of 200 patients, aged 40-65 years, who were free from colon cancer symptoms. All patients underwent complete colonoscopy under local anesthesia. The equipment could be fitted with the scope that allows three-dimensional observation of instrument localization in the bowel. The examination was performed by three experienced endoscopists, each of whom performed over 5,000 colonoscopies. The patients were randomized to two groups: those whose equipment did not have 3D navigation (group I) and those whose equipment did have 3D navigation (group II). Each group consisted of 100 cases matched by gender, age, and BMI. The authors compared the duration of introducing instrument to cecum, the pulse rate before the examination and at the time the instrument reached the cecum, and subjective pain evaluation by the patient on the visual analog scale. RESULTS: Group I consisted of 54 women and 46 men with a mean age of 54.6 years and mean BMI of 27.8 kg/m(2), and group II had 58 women and 42 men, mean age of 55.1 years and mean BMI of 26.4 kg/m(2). The average time it took for the instrument to reach the cecum was 216s in group I and 181s in group II (P < 0.05). Pain measured on the 10-point VAS scale was 2.44 in group I and 1.85 in group II (P < 0.05). The results showed a significantly shorter time for the instrument to reach the cecum in group II and significantly lower pain intensity during the examination was reported by the group II patients. No significant differences were found in the pulse measurements between the groups (P = 0.5). CONCLUSIONS: 3D navigation during colonoscopy decreases the time for the instrument to reach the cecum and lowers pain intensity subjectively reported by the patients. The use of 3D and the possibility to observe instrument localization and maneuvers brings more comfort to the patients.