 PURPOSE: Increased expression of tissue factor (TF) is associated with tumor invasion and metastasis in human colorectal cancer. We have previously observed that TF/FVIIa upregulates matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) expression at the transcriptional level in colon cancer cells. MMP-7 overexpression is believed to play an important role in tumor invasion and metastasis. The aim of this study is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which TF/FVIIa induced MMP-7 expression and cell invasion in vitro. METHODS: Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, luciferase assay, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) were used to determine the potential mechanism and signaling pathways by which TF/FVIIa induced MMP-7 expression and cell invasion in LoVo cells. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) and cell invasion assay was used to examine whether blocking c-Fos expression could abolish FVIIa-mediated upregulation of MMP-7 and cell invasion in vitro. RESULTS: The results showed that FVIIa induced the upregulation of MMP-7 both at the mRNA and protein levels in a time- and dose-dependent manner and increased the invasive behavior of LoVo cells. FVIIa enhanced the promoter activity of MMP-7, and the activator protein-1 (AP-1) binding site was responsible for the activation. Site mutation of the AP-1 binding site in the promoter almost completely abolished FVIIa-mediated response. Furthermore, ChIP assay confirmed that FVIIa promoted the direct binding of c-Fos with the MMP-7 promoter in vivo. FVIIa also induced the expression and nuclear accumulation of the AP-1 subunit c-Fos. siRNA-mediated knockdown of c-Fos eliminated FVIIa-stimulated MMP-7 expression and cell migration in vitro. In addition, selective mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase (MEK1/2) inhibitor (PD98059) and p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 suppressed MMP-7 upregulation induced by FVIIa. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that a novel TF/FVIIa/MAPK/c-Fos/MMP-7 axis plays an important role in modulating the invasion of colon cancer cells and blockage of this pathway holds promise to treat colon cancer metastasis.