 BACKGROUND: Single-incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS) has been used for colorectal cancer as a minimally invasive procedure. However, there are still difficulties concerning effective triangulation and countertraction. The study's purpose was to clarify the usefulness of the colon-lifting technique (CLT) in SILS for colorectal cancer. METHODS: SILS was performed for cancer (cT2N0 or less) of the right-sided colon (near the ileocecum), sigmoid, or rectosigmoid. The SILS™ Port was used for transumbilical access. A suture string was inserted through the abdominal wall and passed through the mesocolon. The colon was retracted anteriorly and fixed to the abdominal wall. The main mesenteric vessels were placed under tension. Lymph node dissection was performed by medial approach. Short-term surgical outcomes and access port costs were compared between SILS (using CLT) and the standard multiport technique (MPT). The two groups were case-matched by propensity scoring. Analyzed variables included preoperative Dukes stage and tumor location. RESULTS: From June 2009 to April 2011, 27 patients underwent SILS, and from April 2005 to April 2011, 85 patients underwent MPT. Propensity scoring generated 23 matched patients per group for SILS versus MPT comparisons. There were no significant differences in operating time, blood loss, early complications, postoperative analgesic frequency, or length of hospital stay. One MPT patient was converted to open surgery (4.5%); no SILS patients were converted. There were no significant differences in the length of distal cut margin and the number of harvested lymph nodes, except incision length (SILS vs. MPT: 33 vs. 55 mm, P < 0.001). Significant differences favored SILS in access instrument cost (SILS vs. MPT: 62,761 vs. 77,130 Japanese yen, P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: SILS performed using CLT was safe and effective in providing radical treatment of cT2N0 cancer in the right-sided colon, sigmoid, or rectosigmoid. SILS was advantageous with respect to cosmesis and lower cost of access instruments.