 BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Treatment outcomes improved in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) due to the introduction of new chemotherapies and monoclonal antibodies. This study describes current patterns of pharmacological treatment for mCRC in clinical practice in four European countries. METHODS: This cohort study used physician-survey data from the LifeLink Oncology Analyzer Database for mCRC patients in France, Germany, Italy and Spain. All patients aged ≥21 years at mCRC diagnosis and with data collected during 2009 were included. Treatment patterns were examined descriptively by lines of therapy. RESULTS: The study sample included 2682 mCRC patients. In first-line, more patients received FOLFOX (infusional 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin and oxaliplatin)- than FOLFIRI (infusional 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin and irinotecan)-, containing regimens in Germany (42 vs. 30%) and Spain (25 vs. 16%), while in Italy and France the reverse was true (Italy: 34% FOLFIRI vs.29% FOLFOX; France: 26 vs. 19%). In second-line, FOLFIRI-containing regimens were more commonly used than FOLFOX-containing regimens in Germany (36 vs. 18%), Italy (29 vs. 14%), and Spain (34 vs. 6%), while similar proportions of FOLFOX and FOLFIRI were used in France (18 vs. 15%). As part of first-line treatment, bevacizumab use ranged from 44% of patients in Italy to 30% in Spain, with slightly lower rates in second-line. Cetuximab first-line use ranged from 14% of patients in Spain to 7% in Italy, increasing in second-line to 30% in Spain, 26% in Italy, 20% in Germany, and 17% in France. Limitations: This analysis focused on description of treatment patterns, however, the actual clinical benefits of these treatment regimens on survival or quality of life were not addressed due to lack of relevant information in the data source. Some country differences in treatment patterns were observed. These differences might be partly explained by differences in local treatment guidelines, physician prescribing behaviours, reimbursement policies, and response to various regimens due to genetic differences. CONCLUSIONS: In clinical practice in four European countries, FOLFOX- and FOLFIRI-based regimens are common standard of care chemotherapies for mCRC (FOLFOX and bevacizumab + FOLFIRI are the most common regimens), and monoclonal antibodies are often combined with these chemotherapies.