 INTRODUCTION: Horner's syndrome has a variety of etiologies ranging from benign to serious life-threatening conditions and has been infrequently reported as a presenting symptom of patients with lymphoid neoplasms. Only one case of Burkitt's lymphoma presenting with toothache, paresthesia, and Horner's syndrome has been described and no case reports of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma as the etiology of Horner's syndrome currently exist in the literature. In addition, lymphoid neoplasms have rarely been reported to occur in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 despite an increased risk of many types of cancer in such cases. CASE PRESENTATION: A 28-year-old Thai man presented with a progressively enlarged left supraclavicular mass together with a significant weight loss and night sweating for four months. He also noticed hoarseness and ptosis of his left eye associated with double vision for two months. Physical examination revealed large supraclavicular lymphadenopathy and Horner's syndrome (ptosis, miosis, and anhydrosis) on the left side of his face. A large mediastinal mass was clearly detected by chest X-ray and computed tomography and subsequent lymph node biopsy provided a diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Interestingly, the patient was also definitely diagnosed with neurofibromatosis type 1 from multiple café au lait macules, axillary freckles, three neurofibromas, multiple Lisch nodules, and a history of affected family members. He subsequently received chemotherapy with a good response. Twenty-seven cases of various types of lymphoid neoplasms previously reported to occur in neurofibromatosis type 1 patients were also extracted from the literature. All cases were non-Hodgkin lymphoma and the major subtype was T-cell. Only nine cases were B-cell lymphoma. The majority of cases were young with a median age at lymphoma diagnosis of 9.4 years (range 1.1 to 77 years). Two-thirds of the cases were boys or men. Other concomitant malignancies were brain tumor, colorectal cancer, pheochromocytoma, and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. CONCLUSIONS: We describe for the first time a case of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma that occurred in a neurofibromatosis type 1 patient with Horner's syndrome. Horner's syndrome can be an initial manifestation of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Patients who present with a classical triad of Horner's syndrome should always be fully investigated for lymphomatous involvement, especially in the thorax. The exact molecular mechanism for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma development in neurofibromatosis type 1 cases remains to be elucidated.