 INTRODUCTION: Dose-limiting neurotoxicity is a major side effect of oxaliplatin treatment, producing initial acute neurotoxicity and chronic neuropathy with increasing exposure. The improvement in survival for patients with early-stage colorectal cancer treated with oxaliplatin has highlighted the need for valid and reliable assessment of peripheral neuropathy. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this paper was to explore neuropathic symptoms in oxaliplatin-treated patients as assessed using different methods. METHODS: Consecutive symptomatic patients reporting peripheral neuropathy after oxaliplatin chemotherapy for colorectal cancer were interviewed using a semi-structured clinical interview. Neurotoxicity was also assessed using the National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria scale (clinician-rated), patient 'self-report' questionnaires (PNQ), nerve conduction and clinical assessment. RESULTS: Twenty patients were assessed, 12.6 ± 2.8 months after treatment cessation (mean cumulative oxaliplatin dose, 789 mg/m(2)). In 40% of patients, neurotoxicity necessitated early cessation of treatment. Only 10% of patients were designated by clinicians with severe neurotoxicity, whilst, in contrast, patient interviews and self-report questionnaires described significant physical limitations due to neuropathic symptoms in 60% of patients. The majority (85%) of patients had objective evidence of sensory neuropathy with nerve conduction studies. Reports from clinical interviews were strongly correlated with patient self-assessment (Pearson coefficient = 0.790, p < 0.0005). CONCLUSION: Given the discrepancies in symptom prevalence highlighted by these findings, the monitoring of oxaliplatin-induced neurotoxicity would benefit from more informative clinical assessment, with inclusion of patient-reported outcome measures. Such an approach would be beneficial in a clinical trial setting to monitor the efficacy of interventions and in prospective studies of survivorship to determine the true burden of peripheral neuropathy in oxaliplatin-treated patients.