 BACKGROUND: The prognostic factors after pulmonary resection in patients with colorectal pulmonary metastases remain controversial. OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to identify the predicting factors for oncological outcomes after curative resection in patients with colorectal cancer and pulmonary metastases. DESIGN: This study is a retrospective review of prospectively collected data. SETTING: This study was conducted at a tertiary care hospital/referral center in South Korea. PATIENTS: Between January 2000 and June 2010, 105 patients who developed pulmonary metastases after curative resection for colorectal cancer were enrolled. Forty-eight patients underwent pulmonary resection, and the remaining 58 were given chemotherapy and/or best supportive care. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcomes measured were the predictive factors of survival and recurrence. RESULTS: During the 35.9-month median follow-up period, 3- and 5-year overall survival rates were 54.6% and 30.4%. On multivariate analysis, absence of adjuvant chemotherapy after pulmonary metastases (p = 0.003), presence of extrapulmonary metastases (p = 0.001), elevated prelaparotomy serum CEA level (p = 0.015), and absence of pulmonary resection (p = 0.048) were independent prognostic factors for poor overall survival. In patients who underwent pulmonary resection, the 3-year pulmonary recurrence-free survival rate was 78.3%. On multivariate analysis, elevated prelaparotomy serum CEA level (p = 0.018) and disease-free interval ≤ 12 months (p = 0.008) were independent risk factors associated with pulmonary re-recurrence after pulmonary resection. LIMITATIONS: This study took place at a single institution and had a small sample size. CONCLUSION: Although we admit, to some degree, the benefits of the selection mechanism, pulmonary metastasectomy from colorectal cancer may improve survival after curative resection of colorectal cancer. Adjuvant chemotherapy, extrapulmonary metastases, and prelaparotomy CEA value are independent prognostic factors for overall survival. Prelaparotomy serum CEA level may be an especially reliable predictor of both overall survival and recurrence-free survival after pulmonary metastasectomy in patients who undergo curative resection for colorectal cancer.