 BACKGROUND: After extended left colectomy, it may be difficult to take down a well-vascularized colon into the pelvis and perform a tension-free colorectal or coloanal anastomosis. The Deloyers procedure comprising complete mobilization and rotation of the right colon while maintaining the ileocolic artery may be used in this circumstance. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to report postoperative and long-term outcomes after the Deloyers procedure as a salvage technique for colorectal anastomosis or coloanal anastomosis. DESIGN: From a prospective database, we retrospectively reviewed all patients who underwent a Deloyers procedure. SETTING: This study was conducted at the Colorectal Unit in a tertiary referral teaching hospital. PATIENTS: Between 1998 and 2011, 48 consecutive patients underwent a Deloyers procedure. Indications were as following: Hartmann reversal (n = 17), previous colorectal anastomosis-related complications (n = 11), diverticular disease (n = 6), left colon cancer (n = 6), ischemic colitis (n = 3), iterative colectomy for cancer (n = 3), rectal cancer local recurrence (n = 1), and synchronous colon cancer (n = 1). RESULTS: There were 38 men and 10 women (median age at surgery, 67 years). Colorectal anastomosis and coloanal anastomosis were performed in 38 and 10 patients. Thirty-one patients had defunctioning stoma. Mortality and early morbidity rate was 2% and 23%. Three patients (6%) had severe complications (Dindo ≥ 3). There was no anastomotic leakage. Reoperation was required in 2 patients for intra-abdominal hemorrhage. The median hospital stay was 12 days. The median follow-up was 26 months. All patients had their ileostomy closed. Twenty-three percent of patients developed late complications. The median number of bowel movements per day was 3 (range, 1-7), but 67% of patients had fewer than 3. One patient required an ileostomy refashioning because of poor functional results, and 23% of patients routinely take loperamide-based medication. LIMITATION: The retrospective nature of the study was a limitation. CONCLUSIONS: The Deloyers procedure is safe, associated with low morbidity and good long-term functional results. It represents a safe alternative to total colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis.