The relationship of molecular abnormalities with clinicopathologic features and survival in colorectal signet ring cell carcinoma, and its comparison with mucinous and conventional adenocarcinomas, has not been well studied. High-level microsatellite instability, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at four loci, CpG island methylation phenotype based on seven loci, BRAF V600E mutation and KRAS mutation in signet ring cell carcinoma were compared with mucinous and conventional adenocarcinomas. The relationship of these molecular features in signet ring cell carcinoma with clinicopathologic features and survival was examined. LOH was observed in 93% of signet ring cell carcinomas compared with 62 and 70% of mucinous and conventional adenocarcinomas. Also, 80% of signet ring cell carcinomas with high-level microsatellite instability showed LOH compared with 14% each of mucinous and conventional adenocarcinomas. High-level microsatellite instability, CpG island methylation phenotype-positive status and BRAF V600E mutation were more often seen in signet ring cell carcinoma and mucinous adenocarcinoma compared with conventional adenocarcinoma. BRAF V600E mutation was significantly associated with CpG island methylation phenotype-positive status. Stage and BRAF V600E mutation in microsatellite-stable cases were the only variables with an affect on survival. In conclusion, chromosomal instability manifested by LOH is nearly a universal finding in signet ring cell carcinoma, including cases with high-level microsatellite instability. This may explain the aggressive behavior of signet ring cell carcinoma irrespective of high-level microsatellite-instability status. BRAF V600E mutation and CpG island methylation phenotype-positive status are similar in signet ring cell carcinoma and mucinous adenocarcinoma but more frequent when compared with conventional adenocarcinoma. In signet ring cell carcinoma, BRAF V600E mutation adversely affects survival in microsatellite-stable tumors, but not in high-level microsatellite-unstable tumors. The high frequency of methylation and BRAF V600E mutation suggests that many signet ring cell carcinomas may be related to the serrated pathway of carcinogenesis.