 BACKGROUND: Delayed repeated intraperitoneal chemotherapy after cytoreductive surgery for carcinomatosis may be an alternative to intraoperative hyperthermic infusion. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety and feasibility of delayed repeated intraperitoneal chemotherapy after cytoreduction of colorectal and appendiceal carcinomatosis and pseudomyxoma peritonei. DESIGN: This study constitutes a retrospective case series. SETTING: This study was conducted at a single institution. PATIENTS: A total of 31 patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis (23) and pseudomyxoma peritonei (8) were included. INTERVENTIONS: Cytoreduction was followed by placement of an adhesion barrier and intraperitoneal catheters. Peritoneal scintigraphy preceded biweekly intraperitoneal 5-fluorouracil and systemic combination chemotherapy with leucovorin, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX). MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcomes measured are safety, feasibility, and short-term survival. RESULTS: Cytoreduction to a score of 0 to 1 was possible in 25 patients (80%). Complications occurred in 16 patients (51.6%) and were confined to grades I to III. There were no deaths, and no digestive fistulae occurred. Port malfunction or complication resulted in removal in 5 patients (16.1%). Intraperitoneal chemotherapy was possible in 83.8% of patients; 55% completed the full course. Peritoneal scintigraphy demonstrated free diffusion of tracer in 18 patients (58%), 4 (12.9%) had diffusion in each gutter with limited communication, 5 (16.1%) had limited diffusion around each catheter without communication, and 2 (6.5%) had no diffusion on scintigraphy. Overall survival for peritoneal carcinomatosis was 44.5% at 3 years (95% CI = 23%-65%). LIMITATIONS: The nonrandomized nature of this study and the early experience are limitations. CONCLUSIONS: Delayed repeated intraperitoneal and systemic chemotherapy after cytoreduction is feasible and has acceptable morbidity rates. Delayed intraperitoneal chemotherapy is possible in 83% of patients.