 OBJECTIVE: To identify factors associated with delays to medical assessment and diagnosis for patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). DESIGN: Data were collected through a standardized questionnaire. Clinical records were also reviewed. When necessary, patients were contacted by a member of the study team to collect missing data and confirm information. SETTING: Cross Cancer Institute in Edmonton, Alta. PARTICIPANTS: Patients newly diagnosed with a histologically proven colorectal adenocarcinoma were identified and eligible for the study. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Associations between symptoms, tumour stage at operation, symptom duration, and tumour location were sought to identify factors associated with a delay in diagnosis of CRC. RESULTS: Surveys were completed by 93 patients. A total of 49% of patients had symptoms of CRC present for 1 month or less before seeing a physician, and 51% had symptoms for longer than 1 month. Seventy-five (86%) patients initially presented to family physicians for assessment, while 12 (14%) patients presented to the emergency department for their first physician encounters. Only 33 (38%) patients had digital rectal examinations during their first visits. Women were more likely to present to physicians with longer than 1 month of symptoms, while men were more likely to present with less than 1 month of symptoms (P = .03). Abdominal pain, blood in the stool, and change in stool size were the most frequent symptoms encountered. Twenty-two (26%) patients delayed seeking treatment because they thought their symptoms were not serious and 12 (14%) believed that their family physicians had taken inappropriate action. Fifteen (18%) patients attributed their delays to waiting too long for specialist referral and diagnostic tests. CONCLUSION: This study highlights the important role patients and physicians both play in delays in the diagnosis of CRC. Efforts to diminish future delays must focus on educating the public and practising physicians about important symptoms and signs of CRC. Additionally, the value of a digital rectal examination must be emphasized, along with continued promotion of CRC screening.