The non-receptor tyrosine kinase SRC is frequently deregulated in human colorectal cancer (CRC), and SRC increased activity has been associated with poor clinical outcomes. In nude mice engrafted with human CRC cells, SRC over-expression favors tumor growth and is accompanied by a robust increase in tyrosine phosphorylation in tumor cells. How SRC contributes to this tumorigenic process is largely unknown. We analyzed SRC oncogenic signaling in these tumors by means of a novel quantitative proteomic analysis. This method is based on stable isotope labeling with amino acids of xenograft tumors by the addition of [(13)C(6)]-lysine into mouse food. An incorporation level greater than 88% was obtained in xenograft tumors after 30 days of the heavy lysine diet. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of these tumors allowed the identification of 61 proteins that exhibited a significant increase in tyrosine phosphorylation and/or association with tyrosine phosphorylated proteins upon SRC expression. These mainly included molecules implicated in vesicular trafficking and signaling and RNA binding proteins. Most of these proteins were specific targets of SRC signaling in vivo, as they were not identified by analysis via stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) of the same CRC cells in culture. This suggests that oncogenic signaling induced by SRC in tumors significantly differs from that induced by SRC in cell culture. We next confirmed this notion experimentally with the example of the vesicular trafficking protein and SRC substrate TOM1L1. We found that whereas TOM1L1 depletion only slightly affected SRC-induced proliferation of CRC cells in vitro, it drastically decreased tumor growth in xenografted nude mice. We thus concluded that this vesicular trafficking protein plays an important role in SRC-induced tumor growth. Overall, these data show that SILAC analysis in mouse xenografts is a valuable approach for deciphering tyrosine kinase oncogenic signaling in vivo.