 UNLABELLED: The impact of adding bevacizumab to perioperative chemotherapy in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) undergoing liver resection is yet to be defined. A retrospective review of our patient records showed that the addition of bevacizumab did not increase morbidity or mortality related to liver resection. Pathologic complete response (CR) is associated with prolonged survival. BACKGROUND: Patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) and liver metastases benefit from perioperative chemotherapy and liver resection. The potential benefit of adding bevacizumab is yet to be defined. The impact of bevacizumab on liver resection complications has been explored in a small number of retrospective studies. METHODS: The records of patients with CRC and liver metastases who underwent liver resection and had received perioperative chemotherapy were reviewed. Complications were reported separately for 2 groups (chemotherapy alone vs chemotherapy and bevacizumab). Survival outcomes (progression-free survival [PFS] and overall survival [OS]) for responders and nonresponders were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. RESULTS: Fifty-two patients received chemotherapy alone and 42 patients received chemotherapy and bevacizumab. The median time from the end of systemic treatment to liver resection was 59 days (33-181 days) for the chemotherapy group and 62 days (44-127 days) for the chemotherapy and bevacizumab group. Postoperative complications developed in 54% of the chemotherapy group and in 48% of the chemotherapy and bevacizumab group. Severe complications (grade III-V) occurred in only 13% and 12%, respectively (P = .822). Pathologic complete response (CR) was seen in 11/94 patients. Poor performance status (PS) before starting chemotherapy was associated with higher rates of complications (P = .002), and severe complications led to prolonged hospital admission (P = .001). Patients with pathologic CR had longer OS (P = .0275), but there was no difference in OS between responders and nonresponders (P = .778). CONCLUSION: The addition of bevacizumab to chemotherapy does not increase liver resection complication rates. Pathologic CR is associated with prolonged survival.