 BACKGROUND: self-expanding metal stents are currently being used as a definitive palliative treatment for malignant colorectal obstruction in patients with incurable disease. Few studies have followed large numbers of patients from stent placement until death, and those few have reported conflicting results in the long-term clinical outcome data. AIMS: this study evaluated the clinical effectiveness of stent placement for malignant colorectal obstruction throughout the patients lives and related factors affecting stent patency, clinical success and complications. METHODS: this was a multicentre, retrospective study of 89 consecutive patients who had undergone attempted expandable stent placement for symptomatic malignant colorectal obstruction during a 10-year period. Data were collected to analyse the sustained relief of obstructive symptoms throughout the patients lives, as well as the technical success, immediate clinical success, stent patency, complications, reinterventions, survival, prognostic factors associated with stent patency and long-term clinical efficacy and risk factors for complications. RESULTS: technical and immediate clinical success were achieved in 95.5% and 91.0% of patients, respectively. A total of 68 out of 89 patients (76.4%) maintained relief of obstruction from stent implantation until death without reintervention. Twenty patients (22.5%) had complications including perforation (n = 4; 4.5%), stent obstruction (n = 8; 9.0%), migration (n = 5; 5.6%) and haemorrhage (n = 3; 3.4%). Stent-related mortality was seen in 1 patient (1.1%). The estimated median survival and estimated mean stent patency were 87.0 and 322.7 days, respectively. In total, 12 of the initial 89 patients (13.5%) needed a colostomy for long-term relief of the obstructive symptoms. Univariate and multivariate analysis detected no significant prognostic factors associated with stent patency, long term clinical efficacy and risk factors for complications; however, the multivariate logistic model revealed a non-significant trend by which the use of chemotherapy was a risk factor for migration (OR = 11.89; p = 0.06). CONCLUSIONS: for palliation of incurable malignant colorectal obstruction, expandable stents can provide sustained relief of obstruction in approximately 75% of patients. The procedure is associated with acceptable morbidity, need for reintervention and minimal mortality.