 OBJECTIVE: To clarify the prognostic factors for patients with obstructive jaundice due to advanced colorectal and gastric cancers who had undergone percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage. METHODS: Baseline variables and clinical outcomes were evaluated for 92 consecutive patients treated with percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage. RESULTS: Of the 92 patients, 32 (35%) had colorectal cancer and the remaining 60 (65%) had gastric cancer. Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage was successfully achieved in 74 (80%) patients, and 39 of them could receive subsequent chemotherapy. The median survival after percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage was 273 days in the 39 patients who had undergone successful percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage and subsequent chemotherapy, 65 days in 35 patients who had undergone successful percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage but who had not received subsequent chemotherapy and 34 days in the remaining 18 patients who had undergone unsuccessful percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (P < 0.001). Multiple liver metastases and hepatic hilar bile duct stricture were independently associated with unsuccessful percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage. Poor performance status, multiple liver metastases, presence of ascites, multiple prior chemotherapy administrations, undifferentiated type histology and high serum CA19-9 level were independently associated with a poor prognosis. A prognostic index calculated based on the number of these six factors was used to classify the patients into a good-risk group (index ≤2) (n = 56) and a poor-risk group (index ≥3) (n = 36). The median survival time and 2-month survival rate for the two groups were 163 and 44 days, respectively, and 85.7 and 33.3%, respectively (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: As regards the introduction of percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage in patients with obstructive jaundice due to colorectal and gastric cancers, careful patient selection might be necessary. A prognostic model seems to be useful for making decisions as to whether percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage is indicated for particular patients.