Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the United States. The liver and lung are the most common sites of distant metastasis of CRC. The approval of newer chemotherapeutic agents such as oxaliplatin, irinotecan, bevacizumab, cetuximab and panitumumab has significantly improved survival, yet the majority of patients still succumb to the disease in less than 2 years. Novel therapeutic agents that can provide significant clinical benefit for metastatic CRC patients are needed. Oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is a promising tool as a cancer therapeutic agent. In this study, we examined the feasibility of repeated intravenous infusions of rVSV in multiple CRC lung metastases, compared with repeated hepatic arterial administration in multifocal CRC liver metastasis in immune competent rats. We established a multifocal liver metastases model or the multiple lung metastases model using a CRC cell line, RCN-H4, implanted into syngeneic F344/DuCrj rats. 4.0x10(6) plaque-forming units (pfu) of recombinant VSV vectors expressing mutant (L289A) Newcastle disease virus fusion protein [rVSV-NDV/F(L289A)] were administered 3 times for 3 consecutive days locally via the hepatic artery for liver metastases or systemically via the penial vein for lung metastases. In the liver metastasis model, significantly enhanced survival was observed with rVSV-NDV/F(L289A)-treated rats (P=0.0196). Median survival was 110 and 25 days, respectively. In addition, 4 out of 7 of the rVSV-NDV/F(L289A)-treated rats demonstrated long-term survival exceeding 100 days. The long-term surviving rats were sacrificed to evaluate for residual malignancy. Liver tumors were not detected. In the lung metastasis model, median survival was 10 [VSV-NDV/F(L289A)-treated rats] and 7 days (control). Although survival was significantly prolonged (P<0.001), none of the rats achieved long-term survival. VSV virotherapy has potential for CRC liver and lung metastases, although systemic venous delivery is much less effective than locoregional delivery such as hepatic arterial infusion.