The latest studies suggest that adhesion molecules are involved in the arising of malignant changes and in distant metastasis induction. The soluble forms of several adhesion molecules, have recently emerged as novel and potentially useful tumor markers. Among a number of identified, high interest wake soluble molecules similar to the immunoglobulin -- soluble intercellular adhesion molecules-1 (sICAM-1) and soluble E-cadherin (sE-cadherin). In the present work, the authors concentrate on one tumor type, colorectal carcinoma, in which distant metastases, are the main cause of failure, in spite of surgical curing of the primary tumor. It is known that TNF-alpha (tumor necrosis factor - alpha) serum concentration of patients with cancer is raised. The changes in soluble adhesion molecules concentrations in serum and others fluids, could be modulated by many different factors affecting cancer cells. In the case of colon cancer one of the factors is a high-fiber diet, containing an anti-cancer chemical, inositol hexaphosphate (IP6). The aim of this study was to estimate the influence of TNF-alpha on the concentration of sICAM-1 and sE-cadherin in the microenvironment of HT-29 malignant epithelial colorectal cells stimulated with IP6. Additonally, adhesive property of HT-29 human colorectal cancer cell line to collagen I was estimated. The HT-29 cells were treated with TNF-alpha (10 ng/mL and 100 ng/mL - estimation of sICAM and sE-cadherin concentration; 100 ng/mL - adhesion assay), IP6 (0.5 mM, 1.0 mM, 2.0 mM) and TNF-alpha in combination with IP6. The level of sICAM-1 and sE-cadherin in cultures of HT-29 cells was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (R&D Systems), and adhesion of the cells to collagen I was investigated by Cyquant Proliferation Assay Kit. The present findings demonstrate that TNF-alpha and inositol hexaphosphate have an effect on the sICAM-1 and sE-cadherin concentration in cultures of HT-29 cells. IP6 at a concentration of 2.0 mM induced a decrease of sE-cadherin concentration in cultures of these cells and significantly reduced their adhesion to collagen I. TNF-alpha at concentration of 100 ng/mL caused the significant increase in the sICAM-1 level, but to a lesser degree in the presence of higher concentrations of IP6. However, TNF-alpha did not cause such a significant increase in sE-cadherin level. The sE-cadherin concentration was most likely associated with inositol hexaphosphate activity.