ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: For centuries silver salts have been used as antimicrobial agents for humans. The activity of silver cations varies on their bioavailability. So delivery methods, solubility and ionization of the silver sources are important parameters to deal metals in biological systems. The bonding of silver cations to biologically compatible ligands enhances their bioavailability and ultimately the activity. Furthermore, due to significant safety profiles, researchers are now interested to explore their anticancer potential. On the other hand, imidazole/benzimidazole-based compounds have been found to have diverse biological and clinical applications due to being structural isosters of naturally occurring nucleotides; which allow such compounds to interact easily with biopolymers of the living system. This property of benzimidazole constituted compounds has created interest in researchers to further explore their biological applications.The connection of these biologically active moieties (silver & azoles) through Ag-NHC bonding provided a biologically enhanced entity that was tested for human colorectal cancer cells (HCT 116). RESULTS: N-ipropylbenzimidazole was synthesized by reaction of benzimidazole with ipropyl bromide. The subsequent treatment of the resulting N-alkylbenzimidazole with ortho/meta/para-(bromomethylene) benzene afforded corresponding bis-benzimidazolium bromides (5-7). The counter anion (Br-) of each salt was replaced by hexaflourophosphate (PF6-) for the ease of handling and further purification (8-10). Each salt (Ligand), in halide form, was further allowed to react with Ag2O with stirring at room temperature for a period of two days to synthesize dinuclear Ag(I)-NHC complexes (11-13). All synthesized compounds were characterized by spectroscopic techniques and microanalysis. Molecular structures of compounds 5, 9 & 10 were established through single crystal x-ray diffraction technique. All the compounds were assessed for their anti-proliferation test on human colorectal cancer cell line (HCT 116). Results showed that the ligands (5-10) showed mild to negligible cytotoxicity on HCT 116 cells whereas respective silver complexes (11-13) exhibited dose dependent cytotoxicity towards the colon cancer cells with IC50 ranges between 9.7 to 44.5 muM. Interestingly, the complex 13 having para-xylyl spacer was found the most active (IC50 9.7 muM) that verifies our previously reported results. CONCLUSIONS: All the bis-benzimidazolium salts (8-10) were found inactive whereas after bonding with silver cations, the Ag(I)-NHC complexes (11-13) showed a dose dependent cytotoxic activity. This proved that silver practice an important role in death of cancer cells. Also, the N-alkyl/aryl substitutions and ortho/metal/para xylyl units regulate the cytotoxicity. Based on the previous and current results it can be concluded that the dinuclear Ag(I)-NHC complexes are potential anticancer agents and could probably be the potential source of chemotherapeutic drugs.