In our previous study, significantly high expression levels of matrix-remodeling associated 5 (MXRA5) were identified in fresh-cultured colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues compared with their normal adjacent mucosa by differential secretome analysis. Whether MXRA5 is a potential serum biomarker of CRC has not been evaluated. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between MXRA5 expression and clinicopathological characteristics of CRC patients. The MXRA5 expression levels were determined by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 20 colorectal adenoma tissues, 156 CRC tissues and their corresponding adjacent normal mucosa. Relative quantity (RQ) value and immunoreactive score (IRS) were used for quantitative assessment. The staining for MXRA5 protein was mainly located in the cytoplasm of CRC cells. All CRC tissues were positively stained, with a higher expression rate (IRS>4) of 67% (105/156), and a lower expression rate (IRS≤4) of 33% (51/156). Meanwhile, their corresponding normal tissues exhibited little positive staining; the higher expression rate was 0% (0/156) and the lower expression rate was 25% (16/156). Additionally, more than half of the adenoma tissues were positively stained; the higher expression rate was 15% (3/20) and the lower expression rate was 50% (10/20). The MXRA5 protein positive staining rates were significantly correlated with the lesion sites (colon vs. rectum, 76 vs. 59%), TNM staging (I+II vs. III+IV, 56 vs. 73%) and metastasis (present vs. absent; 76 vs. 61%) with the most high positive staining rate observable in omental metastasis (82%). However, MXRA5 mRNA expression levels showed no significant differences between CRC tissues and their corresponding normal tissues, and no significant correlation between IRS and corresponding RQ value was observed. In this study, we present the first evaluation of MXRA5 protein expression in CRC tissue. Our results revealed that MXRA5 protein is aberrantly expressed in CRC tissues, and has potential value in early detection of CRC and prediction of omental metastasis.