PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to examine the relationships between physical activity (PA), social participation, and health-related quality of life (HQOL) in older, long-term colorectal cancer survivors. METHODS: Male and female colorectal cancer survivors (n = 1,768), aged ≥65 and ≥5 years post-diagnosis, completed surveys on their current PA, social participation, HQOL, health history, and relevant covariates. Analysis of covariance was used to evaluate the cross-sectional relationship between PA and social participation with the SF-36 subscales, as well as the physical component summary score (PCS) and mental health component summary score (MCS). RESULTS: The final analytic sample (n = 832) was 81.5 ± 5.8 years and 8.2 ± 1.7 years post-diagnosis (mean ± SD). Meeting the current recommendation of 150 min/week of PA was associated with higher PCS (p < 0.001) but not MCS (p = 0.30). Engaging in any social participation, vs. none, was associated with MCS (p = 0.003), but not PCS (p = 0.13). There was a dose-response relationship between moderate-vigorous-intensity PA and PCS (p trend<0.001). Light-intensity PA was not associated with either summary score after adjustment for moderate-vigorous PA (p > 0.05), but in survivors performing no higher-intensity PA, it was associated with both (p < 0.01, p = 0.02, respectively). Participants reporting greater amounts of both planned exercise and non-exercise PA had significantly higher PCS (p trend<0.01, p trend < 0.01, respectively). Individuals participating in greater weekly hours of social participation had higher PCS and MCS (p trend<0.05) than those participating in less. CONCLUSIONS: Among older, long-term colorectal cancer survivors, PA is related to their physical health, while social participation is predominantly related to their mental health. IMPLICATIONS FOR CANCER SURVIVORS: Older colorectal cancer survivors who participate socially and are engaged in PA, even non-exercise and light-intensity activities, have higher levels of physical and mental health.