PURPOSE: The aim of the present study was to investigate the diagnostic potential of contrast-enhanced transcranial color-coded real-time sonography (CE-TCCS) in otherwise ultrasound-refractory acute stroke patients with an ischemia in the territory of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). Furthermore, correlations of CE-TCCS findings with clinical, angiographic, and CT results were investigated. METHODS: In 90 acute stroke patients with inadequate insonation conditions in unenhanced transcranial color-coded real-time sonography (TCCS) examinations, CE-TCCS, clinical, angiographic, and CT examinations were performed within 12 hours, 36 hours (CE-TCCS only), and 1 week after onset of clinical symptoms. A CT angiography (CTA) as reference method was available in 39 individuals. After application of a galactose-based echo-enhancing agent, the portion of conclusive ultrasound examinations of the MCA, as manifested by an MCA occlusion, decreased or increased flow velocity (FV), and symmetrical MCA FV, was evaluated. CE-TCCS findings on admission and during follow-up were correlated with infarction size as demonstrated on follow-up CT, and clinical findings were assessed by use of the European Stroke Scale. RESULTS: Adequate diagnosis was achieved in 74 of 90 patients (82%) by the use of echo contrast agents. MCA occlusion or reduction of MCA FV was found in 20 and 27 patients, respectively. MCA occlusion was confirmed by CTA in 17 cases. In one individual, false-positive diagnosis of MCA occlusion was made according to ultrasound criteria. In 5 patients with MCA occlusion, vessel recanalization was observed during follow-up; 15 of 27 patients with decreased flow velocities showed normalization after the third examination that was associated with a significantly better clinical outcome (P<0.0001). Furthermore, MCA occlusion or decreased FV in the first 12 hours were associated with significantly larger infarctions in the MCA territory compared with normal CE-TCCS findings (P<0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: CE-TCCS enables adequate diagnosis in approximately 80% of acute hemispheric stroke patients with insufficient unenhanced TCCS examinations. It is a reliable diagnostic tool regarding MCA mainstem and branch occlusions. Because this method conveys useful information concerning cerebral tissue and clinical prognosis, it may be useful to identify those patients who benefit most from local or intra-arterial thrombolytic therapy.