BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency, possible predictive factors, and prognosis of deteriorating ischemic stroke in 4 clinical categories according to the classification of the Oxfordshire Community Stroke Project (OCSP). METHODS: A total of 350 patients with first-ever ischemic stroke who presented within 24 hours of onset were enrolled. Based on the OCSP criteria, cerebral infarctions were divided into the following 4 clinical categories: total anterior circulation infarcts (TACI), partial anterior circulation infarcts (PACI), lacunar infarcts (LACI), and posterior circulation infarcts (POCI). Clinical deterioration was defined as a decrease of >/=1 points in the Canadian Neurological Scale (CNS) (in TACI, PACI, and LACI) or Rankin Scale (RS) (in POCI) during 7 days from the onset. In each clinical category, deteriorating (D) and nondeteriorating (ND) patients were compared in terms of their background characteristics, risk factors, vital signs, laboratory data, and cranial CT at the time of hospitalization. The acute-phase mortality and functional outcome were also compared. RESULTS: The subjects comprised 86 patients (24.6%) with TACI, 63 (18.0%) with PACI, 141 (40.3%) with LACI, and 60 (17.1%) with POCI. Overall, 90 patients (25.7%) deteriorated. The frequency was very high in TACI (41.9%), followed by LACI (26.2%) and POCI (21.7%), whereas it was very low in PACI (6. 3%). There were some clinical variables that differed significantly between D and ND groups. In the patients with TACI, early abnormalities of the cranial CT and significant stenoses in corresponding arteries were more frequent in the D than the ND group. In those with LACI, the CNS and hematocrit were lower in the D than the ND group. In those with POCI, cerebral atrophy was more severe and significant stenoses in vertebrobasilar arteries were more frequent in the D than ND group. The mortality of the D groups of patients with TACI and POCI exceeded 35%, and the functional outcome was worse in the D group than in the ND group of patients with TACI, LACI, and POCI. CONCLUSIONS: The frequency of deterioration in acute ischemic stroke significantly differed among the OCSP subgroups, and deterioration worsened the prognosis. There were some factors that could predict deterioration: early CT findings in TACI, large-artery atherosclerosis in TACI and POCI, and stroke severity in LACI. Further research to find sophisticated radiological and chemical markers appears to be needed.