OBJECT: Evidence from recent in vitro studies indicates that reactivation of telomerase, the enzyme that synthesizes the telomere ends of chromosomes, is a crucial event in the unlimited clonal expansion of endothelial cells that precedes the neoplastic conversion of these cells. It is known that high-grade gliomas express telomerase and that, in these neoplasms, proliferating endothelial cells may undergo transformational changes with development of sarcomatous components within the primitive tumor. To assess whether telomerase is involved in the endothelial cell proliferation that characterizes brain tumor angiogenesis, the authors investigated at the single-cell level the expression of messenger (m)RNA for the human telomerase catalytic subunit human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) by vascular cells of astrocytic tumors. METHODS: The in situ hybridization (ISH) method was performed by processing histological sections with specific riboprobes for hTERT and for c-myc, an oncogene that is known to upregulate hTERT. Results of the ISH studies were compared with proliferative activity, as estimated by Ki-67 immunostaining. The expression of hTERT mRNA by vascular endothelial cells was related to the histological grade of the tumor because it was detected in five (29%) of 17 low-grade astrocytomas, nine (56%) of 16 anaplastic astrocytomas, and 19 (100%) of 19 glioblastomas multiforme (GBMs). Expression of c-myc mRNA was strictly correlated with that of hTERT mRNA. In low-grade astrocytomas and anaplastic astrocytomas, a dissociation was noted between hTERT mRNA expression and the proliferation rate of endothelial cells. Conversely, GBMs displayed a significant correlation between the level of hTERT mRNA expression and endothelial cell proliferation. Data from an in vitro assay in which human umbilical vein endothelial cells were stimulated to proliferate by adding vascular endothelial growth factor and an ISH study of newly formed vessels surrounding brain infarcts confirmed that expression of hTERT mRNA does not merely reflect the proliferative status of endothelial cells but represents a specific feature of brain tumor neovascularization. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study are consistent with a role of telomerase in the angiogenesis of astrocytic tumors. Expression of hTERT mRNA by tumor vascular cells is an early event during the progression of astrocytic tumors, which precedes endothelial cell proliferation and may represent a first sign of dedifferentiation. Other than elucidating the mechanisms of tumor angiogenesis, these results encourage research on antitelomerase drugs for the treatment of malignant gliomas.