This study was done to establish the relationship between disorders of lipid metabolism and risk factors of ischemic cerebrovascular stroke, search for correlations between disorders of lipid metabolism and severity of ischemic stroke, and assess the association between fibrinogen levels in serum and risk factors in patients suffering from different types of ischemic stroke. Altogether, 117 patients were enrolled, including 76 males and 41 females aged 20 to 55 years (mean--45.3 years). The patients were divided into three groups depending on the dynamics of neurological symptoms: (1) transient ischemic attacks (TIA); (2) reversible ischemic neurologic deficit (RIND); (3) completed stroke (CS). The diagnosis was based on history-taking, physical examination, laboratory tests and neuro-imaging studies. The tests included a complete blood count, glucose, glucose tolerance, 24-hour glucose profile, coagulation profile, fibrinogen, total cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL and LDL cholesterol fractions, and beta-lipoproteins. Blood was collected on the first day of hospitalization prior to any medication. An ECG, CT, and Doppler USG of carotid vessels were done. Cardiac etiology of stroke was ruled out with Holter ECG and echocardiography. The results were subjected to statistical analysis with Yule's coefficient for two qualitative variables. Lipid disorders usually co-existed with obesity, fat-rich diets and sedentary lifestyle in all ischemic stroke types studied. They were accompanied by elevated blood pressures in every type of stroke and by diabetes in TIA. Lipid disorders were found to co-exist with other risk factors for ischemic stroke predominantly in female patients, while in male patients these disorders were an independent risk factor for ischemic stroke. The extent of lipid disorders correlated with the severity of ischemic stroke. Elevated levels of fibrinogen in serum were detected in female patients in every type of stroke. In male patients, elevated fibrinogen was found only in TIA and co-existed with high blood pressure, diabetes and obesity.