BACKGROUND: A newly synthesized free-radical scavenger, MCI-186 (3-methyl-1-phenyl-2-pyrazolin-5-1), was recently approved in Japan for treating acute brain infarction. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether or not MCI-186 is effective in reducing ischemia-reperfusion injury in the extremities. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Warm ischemia was sustained for 4 hours. The animals were divided into 4 groups: (1) sham group, (2) control group (saline injection), (3) MCI group (MCI-186 injection), and (4) EPC group (EPC-K1 [(l-ascorbic acid 2-[3,4-dihydro-2, 5,7,8-tetramethyl-2-(4,8,12-trimethyltridecyl)-2H-1-benzopyran-6-yl hydrogen phosphate] potassium salt], a hydroxyl-radical scavenger, injection). Wet and dry (W/D) weights of the gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior muscles, muscle contractile function, and serum levels of creatine phosphokinase (CPK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), glutamic oxaloacetic transminase (GOT), and mitochondrial glutamic oxaloacetic transminase (GOT-m) were measured after 24 h of reperfusion. The cytotoxic aldehydes malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal as indices of lipid peroxidation (LPO), and neutrophil-specific enzyme myeloperoxidase (MPO) as an index of neutrophil infiltration, were measured in the gastrocnemius muscle. RESULTS: Contractile functions in the MCI and EPC groups were significantly better than in the control group. In the tibialis anterior muscle, the contractile function was better in the MCI group than in the EPC group. W/D ratios and serum levels of CPK, LDH, GOT, and GOT-m were lower in the sham and MCI groups than in the control group. Levels of LPO and MPO activity were significantly lower in the MCI and EPC groups than in the control group. Histological findings demonstrated that inflammatory tissue reactions rarely occurred in the MCI group. CONCLUSION: MCI-186 is effective in preventing ischemia-reperfusion injury in extremities. MCI-186 seems to have promise as a therapeutic agent, because it prevents ischemia-reperfusion injury even in the tibialis anterior muscle, which contains fast-twitch glycolytic fibers, known to be very susceptible to ischemic insult.