Few behavioral tests are available to evaluate extrapyramidal dysfunctions after focal cerebral ischemia in rodents, although extrapyramidal motor dysfunctions are often observed clinically in patients with cerebral infarction. We evaluated the methamphetamine (MP)-induced rotation test for the detection and quantification of extrapyramidal motor dysfunction induced by striatal infarction in gerbils after focal cerebral ischemia. Mongolian gerbils (n=79) underwent the left common carotid artery occlusion (CCAO) for 10, 15, or 20 min. Spontaneous and MP-induced rotation tests were repeated postischemia, and the results compared with the extent of ischemic tissue injury. The density of dopaminergic neurons immunostained with a tyrosine hydroxylase antibody in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) also was measured. Histological examination revealed selective neuronal death of the hippocampal cornu ammonis 1 (CA1) sector in 10-min CCAO animals, infarction confined to the striatum and hippocampal neuronal death in 15-min CCAO animals, and widespread hemispheric infarction in 20-min CCAO animals. Dopaminergic neurons in the SNpc were preserved in 10- and 15-min CCAO animals but were significantly reduced in 20-min CCAO animals. In MP-induced rotation tests, 15-min CCAO animals showed biased rotation ipsilateral to the lesioned side. Biased rotation persisted 4 weeks postischemia, and the number of rotations significantly correlated with the regional infarction volume of the striatum. Twenty-minute CCAO animals showed biased rotation contralateral to the lesioned side; rotation number was not correlated with the infarction volume. Our results show that biased rotation behavior is a sensitive parameter of the extent of striatal injury after focal cerebral ischemia provided the lesion is not extended to the ipsilateral cortex. MP-induced rotation in rodents probably coordinates with the extrapyramidal motor dysfunction after striatal infarction in patients with vascular Parkinsonism.