The aim of this study is to assess safety, reliability, ease of use and usefulness of filter protection devices during angioplasty and stenting of stenotic lesions of the cervical carotid bifurcation. Over a period of 42 months, 53 patients harboring a cervical carotid bifurcation stenotic lesion were treated, by angioplasty and/or stenting using filter protection devices of different kinds. The stenosis was atherosclerotic in 48 cases, post-surgical in four and post-radiation in one case. In all cases, the treatment was successful, with good restoration of the luminal diameter. There were three major strokes (5.6%) and one minor stroke (1.9%). Two of these (one major, one minor) occurred a few hours after the stenting procedure and both seemed by all evidence due to a hemorrhagic hyperperfusion syndrome. One hemiparesis and dysphasia occurred two days after the procedure, secondary to subacute thrombosis with occlusion of the stent. One patient complained of three episodes of decrease in visual acuity of the eye ipsilateral to the stenting in the two weeks following treatment. In conclusion, in our experience, use of the devices adds only few minutes to the procedure time; direct lesions of the arterial wall, such as dissections or intraluminal thrombi, related to the use of filters were never observed, and spasm of the distal I.C.A. also proved rapidly regressive. The content of all filters, if any, was histologically examined, but plaque material was found only in one case, probably owing to our primary stenting technique without use of pre-dilation. The major technical drawback is in-filter coagulation, which occurred in 16 cases, occluding the membrane of the filter and thus slowing or blocking intracranial flow. Such an event can be counteracted by a more aggressive anti-coagulation protocol, which could, however, be responsible for the two complications with hemorrhagic brain infarction. Furthermore, we observed two other major neurological events, which bring the incidence of neurological complications in this series as high as 7.5%. Therefore, it is our opinion that safety of filters is not yet proven, and consequently great care must be taken in their use.