The progression from ischemic injury to pannecrosis that occurs in the rat brain several hours after occluding a large artery may be partly attributable to a worsening of the circulation through the microvessels. The objective of this study was to quantitate selected structural changes involving astrocytes and endothelial cells within an area of focal brain ischemia created by the occlusion of a middle cerebral artery. The magnitude of these structural changes was correlated with alterations in the patency to a circulating macromolecule through the microvessels (< or = 15 mu in diameter) located within the territory of the occluded artery. One hundred eighty-five adult male Wistar rats had the right middle cerebral artery occluded after threading a nylon monofilament through the external carotid artery. Experiments were terminated by either cardiovascular perfusion or decapitation and immersion fixation at intervals ranging between 30 minutes and 7 days after the arterial occlusion. Randomly selected animals from each experimental subgroup were injected intravenously with horseradish peroxidase (molecular weight 44 kd) approximately 20 minutes before death. The progressive decline in the area fraction comprised by the vessels filled with horseradish peroxidase was preceded at 30 to 60 minutes by an increase in the surface area occupied (on a cross-section of a microvessel) by endothelial cells (both nucleus and cytoplasm). This was followed by an increase of 23.7% in the mean diameter of astrocytes nuclei and a decrease of approximately 35% in lumenal surface of the microvessels. These observations suggest that the occlusion of a large cerebral artery causes prompt swelling of endothelial cells and astrocytes; both of these early biological responses may interfere with erythrocyte circulation and oxygen delivery, which (after the arterial occlusion) are entirely dependent on the circulation provided by the collateral arterial connections. Through its interference with microvascular patency and oxygen delivery, cell swelling may influence the rate at which neurons become necrotic. In this model of brain infarct the number of necrotic neurons peaks approximately 72 hours after middle cerebral artery occlusion.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)