Visual neglect can be a major disability after stroke and may impede rehabilitation.1 and 2 Early detection of the disorder is important for allocation of rehabilitation resources.3 We studied to what extent visual neglect can be measured as a solitary defect and how it can be assessed in acute stroke patients.A consecutive series of 52 patients with a first-ever single acute right hemisphere brain infarct admitted to Tampere University Hospital was assessed for visual neglect by the six conventional subtests of the behavioural inattention test4 (BIT) within 10 (mean 6&#xb7;0 ) days of stroke. The lesions were visualised with computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. The exclusion criteria were history of neurological disorders, premorbid cognitive deterioration, insufficient cooperation, primary visual impairment, left-handedness, and age over 75 years. The mean age was 63 (10) years and the mean number of years of education was 8 (1&#xb7;7). 33 of the patients were men and 19 were women.A factor analysis computed for the whole group of patients showed that each of the six conventional BIT subtests had high loadings (0&#xb7;89) on the factor that accounted for 85% of their total variance, indicating that neglect could be measured as a solitary defect with these tests.5 20 patients did not reach the original cut-off score in at least two of the six BIT subtests (the criterion for neglect) and were considered as neglect patients. The table shows the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of each subtest and their combinations in the detection of the neglect patients from the total series. To reduce the number of tests and still identify as many neglect patients as possible, we looked for high sensitivity and specificity (both 0&#xb7;80). To simplify the procedure, we modified the criteria so that one failure in any test of two or three subtest combinations instead of the original two would mean neglect. The best single test was star cancellation, which misdiagnosed four neglect patients and three non-neglect patients. The best two-subtest combination was figure copying and line bisection, misclassifying one neglect patient and five non-neglect patients. The best three-test combination (line crossing, letter cancellation, and line bisection) failed to identify only one patient in each group.