BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The neuronal death that accompanies an ischemic stroke has previously been attributed to a necrotic process. However, numerous studies in experimental models of ischemia have recently indicated that programmed cell death, also called apoptosis, may contribute to neuronal death. The aim of the present study was to investigate the intrathecal levels of proteins regulating apoptosis in acute stroke and to relate these levels to brain damage and to production of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. METHODS: Thirty stroke patients were studied prospectively on days 0 to 4, 7 to 9, 21 to 26, and after day 90 with clinical evaluation, radiological assessment, and analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of soluble (s) Fas/APO-1 and sbcl-2, 2 proteins that regulate apoptosis. In addition, analysis of the intrathecal levels of cytokines interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha was performed. Nineteen CSF samples from healthy subjects were used for control purposes. The patients were examined with MRI 1 to 3 months after stroke onset for measurement of infarct volume RESULTS: Significantly decreased CSF levels of sFas/APO-1 were observed during the entire observation period, with a maximal decrease on day 21 after the onset of stroke. The intrathecal levels of sFas/APO-1 were significantly negatively correlated with the volume of brain infarct and with the neurological deficit 3 weeks and 3 months after the onset of the stroke. In addition, the intrathecal levels of sFas/APO-1 were significantly correlated with the levels of IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-10, and GM-CSF 3 weeks after the onset of the disease. The intrathecal levels of sbcl-2 were significantly decreased during the first 3 days after stroke onset and at the same time were positively correlated with the levels of IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates decreased intrathecal levels of proteins with antiapoptotic properties, suggesting that patients with acute stroke display a propensity toward apoptosis. Control of factors regulating apoptosis may lead to decreased delayed brain damage in stroke.