 OBJECTIVE AND IMPORTANCE: Locked-in syndrome is a state of preserved consciousness in the setting of quadriplegia, anarthria, and usually also includes lateral gaze palsy. It is most commonly associated with upper brainstem infarction variably sparing the third cranial nerve nucleus. There are likely many etiologies that contribute to this clinical syndrome. These are incompletely understood, and the syndrome remains a rare but devastating complication that can occur after neurosurgical and neurovascular interventions. Advanced magnetic resonance imaging techniques such as perfusion and diffusion tensor imaging may help to elucidate the mechanism behind locked-in syndrome. To the authors' knowledge, there are no reports in the literature of perfusion and diffusion tensor findings in patients with this syndrome. A postprocedural case of locked-in syndrome is described with abnormalities on perfusion and diffusion tensor imaging in the absence of any changes in conventional magnetic resonance imaging. CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 57-year-old man who presented with acute onset headache, ataxia, and other nonspecific symptoms was found on imaging to have a giant fusiform basilar artery aneurysm. INTERVENTION: A saphenous vein graft bypass between the proximal right external carotid artery and P2 segment of the right posterior cerebral artery followed immediately by endovascular embolization of the aneurysm sac and distal left vertebral artery was performed. CONCLUSION: Postprocedural angiography demonstrated patency of the bypass graft, and diffusion weighted imaging showed no evidence for acute brainstem infarction. Nevertheless, despite technically successful procedures and the absence of abnormalities on conventional magnetic resonance imaging, the patient developed quadriplegia and anarthria and remained in a locked-in state until he expired. Abnormalities were, however, seen on both perfusion and diffusion tensor imaging, where hypoperfusion, increased mean diffusivity, and decreased fractional anisotropy were observed in the ventral brainstem. The findings suggested a disruption of pontine white matter tracts. Advanced imaging techniques may allow us to image important microstructural changes that were previously not discernable and assist in the evaluation of patients with complex neurological sequelae such as locked-in syndrome.