Haemangiomas and vascular malformations of the limb in children are often difficult to manage. The role of surgery and intervention in current management is still not clear. The aim of this study was to review our experience of such patients. Patients were identified using the health board database of inpatient admissions between 1999 and 2003. Clinical notes were reviewed and data collected looking at patient demographics, site of lesion, clinical findings, investigative procedures, intervention and follow-up. A total of 288 patients were identified with a diagnosis of "Haemangioma" or "vascular malformation". Thirty-eight of these patients were found to have limb haemangiomas or vascular malformations (20 boys and 18 girls). The median age at referral was 1.9 years (0-13.2). The clinical presentation included gigantism, swelling, bruising, bleeding and cosmetic concern. Cosmetic concerns and bleeding being the most frequent. Investigative modalities were used in 19 patients. These included ultrasound, CT, MRI and angiography. Many patients had more then one imaging modality employed. Treatment options included observation, steroids, laser, embolisation and surgical excision. Twenty-five patients (66%) required surgical intervention. Most patients were required one or two procedures, mainly laser or simple excision. However two patients required multiple procedures while one patient with Kasabach-Merritt syndrome required a limb amputation. Patients were followed-up for a median of 3.75 years (0.08-14). Two patients were lost to follow-up. Two patients were noted to have related psychological problems. Haemangiomas and vascular malformations of the limb can be associated with significant functional impairment, especially if they are extending to deeper tissue planes. Such patients are likely to require surgical intervention. For many patients referred to tertiary care, surgery is still the mainstay of treatment and the only curative option. Serious complications were more common in patients with arterio-venous malformations and Kasabach-Merritt syndrome. Two of 38 patients (5.3%) were referred for formal psychological assessment. Given the potential for psychological morbidity we fear this is an aspect of care that may be under-recognised and require further specialist input.