 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: RASA1-related disorders are characterized by the presence of multiple, small (1-2 cm in diameter) capillary malformations mostly localized on the face and limbs. About 30% of affected individuals also have associated arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) and/or arterio-venous fistulas (AFVs), fast-flow vascular anomalies that typically arise in the skin, muscle, bone, spine, and brain; life-threatening complications of these lesions can include bleeding, congestive heart failure, and/or neurologic consequences. Symptoms from intracranial AVMs/AVFs seem to occur early in life. Several individuals with a RASA1 mutation have the clinical diagnosis of Parkes Weber syndrome (multiple micro-AVFs associated with a cutaneous capillary stain and excessive soft tissue and skeletal growth of an affected limb). DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is based on clinical findings and molecular genetic testing of RASA1, the only gene in which mutations are associated with RASA1-related disorders. Such testing is available on a clinical basis.  MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: for capillary malformations that are of cosmetic concern, referral to a dermatologist. For AVMs and AVFs, the risks and benefits of intervention (embolization vs. surgery) must be considered, usually with input from a multi-disciplinary team (e.g., specialists in interventional radiology, neurosurgery, surgery, cardiology, and dermatology). For cardiac overload, referral to a cardiologist. For hemihypertrophy and/or leg length discrepancy, referral to an orthopedist. Surveillance: repeat imaging studies if clinical signs/symptoms of AVMs/AVFs become evident. Agents/circumstances to avoid: It is suggested that routine use of anticoagulants be avoided unless indicated for treatment of a different medical condition.  Testing of relatives at risk: If the family-specific mutation is known, molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives allows early diagnosis and, thus, prompt treatment of AVMs/AVFs in order to reduce/avoid secondary adverse outcomes. At-risk infants are candidates for prompt diagnosis given the early presentation of neurologic complications from intracranial AVMs/AVFs.  GENETIC COUNSELING: RASA1-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most individuals diagnosed with a RASA1-related disorder have an affected parent; 30% of cases are caused by a de novo mutation. Each child of an individual with a RASA1-related disorder has a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation. Prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the disease-causing mutation of an affected family member is known.