 BACKGROUND: Acute vertebrobasilar artery (VBA) occlusion is catastrophic. For embolic occlusion, thrombolysis is reasonable. However, if the occlusion is atherosclerotic, the best therapeutic approach remains unclear. The aim of this study was to characterize the clinical course, case selection, techniques and complications associated with acute to subacute surgical revascularization in atherosclerotic vertebrobasilar occlusion under appropriate patient selection based on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) combined with careful evaluation of progressive neurological symptoms. METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed nine consecutive patients who were scheduled to undergo acute to subacute surgical revascularization for progressing stroke in atherosclerotic VBA occlusion consisting of a relatively small DWI lesion. Clinical characteristics, radiological findings, results of revascularization, and 3-month outcomes (mRS) were assessed. RESULTS: Seven patients underwent surgical revascularization (superficial temporal artery [STA]-superior cerebellar artery [SCA] bypass, n = 5; occipital artery [OA]-posterior inferior cerebellar artery [PICA] bypass, n = 1; vertebral endarterectomy, n = 1). Revascularization distal to the occlusion was successful in all seven patients. Two patients scheduled for STA-SCA bypass sustained irreversible confluent brainstem infarction before surgical intervention and died. The median time between admission and surgical treatment or irreversible coma was 20 h (range, 4-72 h). The modified Rankin Scale (mRS) at 3 months of seven patients who underwent surgical revascularization was good (mRS 0-2) in four patients, poor (mRS 3-6) in three patients. Mid- to long-term bypass patency was confirmed by magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) in the surviving five patients at a median follow-up of 7 months (range, 1-25 months). CONCLUSION: Atherosclerotic vertebrobasilar artery (VBA) occlusion presented with stuttering onset of symptoms and patients developed worsening symptoms of vertebrobasilar insufficiency over hours to days. DWI was a useful modality to help guide the appropriate selection of patients for acute to subacute surgical revascularization for progressing stroke in atherosclerotic VBA occlusion. The surgical methods themselves were feasible. Poor outcomes were related to delay of treatment rather than surgical or technical failure.