A long-term follow-up study (minimum duration 2 years) was made of 13 patients with tortuous dilated basilar arteries. Of these, five patients had symptoms related to the presence of such arteries. Symptoms present at a very early stage included vertebrobasilar insufficiency in two patients, brainstem infarction in two patients, and left hemifacial spasm in one patient. Initial magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in serial slices of basilar arteries obtained from the five symptomatic patients showed an intimal flap or a subadventitial hematoma, both of which are characteristic of a dissecting aneurysm. In contrast, the basilar arteries in the eight asymptomatic patients did not show particular findings and they remained clinically and radiologically silent during the follow-up period. All of the lesions in the five symptomatic patients gradually grew to fantastic sizes, with progressive deterioration of the related clinical symptoms. Dilation of the basilar artery was consistent with hemorrhage into the "pseudolumen" within the laminated thrombus, which was confirmed by MR imaging studies. Of the five symptomatic patients studied, two died of fatal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and two of brainstem compression; the fifth patient remains alive without neurological deficits. In the three patients who underwent autopsy, a definite macroscopic double lumen was observed in both the proximal and distal ends of the aneurysms within the layer of the thickening intima. Microscopically, multiple mural dissections, fragmentation of internal elastic lamina (IEL), and degeneration of media were diffusely observed in the remarkably extended wall of the aneurysms. The substantial mechanism of pathogenesis and enlargement in the symptomatic, highly tortuous dilated artery might initially be macroscopic dissection within a thickening intima and subsequent repetitive hemorrhaging within a laminated thrombus in the pseudolumen combined with microscopic multiple mural dissections on the basis of a weakened IEL. The authors note and caution that symptomatic, tortuous dilated basilar arteries cannot be overlooked because they include a group of malignant arteries that may grow rapidly, resulting in a fatal course.