Postherpetic neuralgia usually merges with the pain of acute shingles.1 Occasionally, however, neuralgia develops after a lengthy pain-free interval.2 This report of four patients seen over 2 years suggests a possible trigger.An 80-year-old woman developed shingles affecting the first and second divisions of the right trigeminal nerve which resolved within 3 weeks. 10 years later she underwent an uneventful right cataract extraction. Within 24 h she developed persistent and intractable burning pain in the distribution of her previous shingles rash. Examination showed mild hypoalgesia in this area.A 75-year-old woman developed shingles affecting the first division of the left trigeminal nerve coinciding with a left-sided brainstem stroke. The skin lesions and nearly all the brainstem features resolved over a few weeks. 6 months later, she developed pain and blurring of vision in her left eye. A dendritic corneal ulcer was found which, although unproven virologically, was judged clinically typical of herpes simplex infection. She received topical aciclovir and recovered within 3 months. With the onset of the dentritic ulcer she developed severe burning pain affecting the first division of the left trigeminal nerve, where there was hyperpathia, allodynia, and impaired temperature appreciation.A 71-year-old man developed shingles affecting the first division of the right trigeminal nerve, with eyelid oedema and punctate epithelial erosions which were treated with aciclovir and steroids. He recovered within 6 weeks. 18 months later, he developed a small, painful venous cavernous haemangioma of his right upper lip. Simultaneously he also developed persistent discomfort with numbness and tingling affecting the first and second divisions of the right trigeminal nerve, where hypoalgesia, dysaesthesiae, and allodynia were detectable.A 45-year-old woman developed shingles affecting the right nasociliary nerve accompanied by acute iritis. She received topical aciclovir and steroid eye drops, and recovered within a month. 2 years later, she developed burning pain affecting the right eye and side of the nose, coinciding with a dull pain in the right upper jaw. A chronic abscess of the right upper lateral incisor was found and the tooth was extracted. Whilst the jaw pain resolved, the ocular and nasal pains persisted. Examination showed three tiny depigmented skin lesions and moderate hyperalgesia in the distribution of the right nasociliary nerve.These patients' pain and sensory disturbances, occurring in the same distribution as their previous shingles, probably represent delayed-onset postherpetic neuralgia. That the subsequent disorders affected the same or almost the same area as the shingles and coincided with the onset of the neuralgia suggest that they triggered the neuralgia. Two possible mechanisms suggest themselves. Peripheral provoking events, that sometimes precede shingles,3 could induce further viral reactivation here manifesting as zoster sine herpete. More plausible is that though neuropathic sequelae following zoster infection4 may persist subclinically, additional noxious input can cause the threshold for development of postherpetic neuralgia to be exceeded.