OBJECTIVES: Clinical-diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) mismatch (CDM) in patients with anterior circulation occlusions is an optional method used to select patients for recanalisation outside the 3-h time window. A similar concept has not been reported with posterior circulation occlusions. METHODS: CDM was defined as a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score <8 with DWI lesions not located in the dorsal pons, midbrain or thalamus at the time of admission. Eligible patients were treated with endovascular recanalisation therapy (ERT). The treatment included intra-arterial rt-PA thrombolysis and angioplasty and stenting performed separately or combined. The recanalisation result was assessed by angiography immediately after the treatment according to the trial reports in the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction Criteria (TIMI). The complications and outcome 3 months later were recorded. RESULTS: Nine patients with a mean age of 66.6 years were included in the study (7 men and 2 women). The median durations of clinical presentation and coma were 31h (range 25-53h) and 6h (range 2-13h). The median GCS score at admission was 6 (range 4-7). Occlusions were located in the proximal basilar artery (BA) (n=2) and the middle BA (n=7). ERT was successful in 8 patients (TIMI 2, n=2 and TIMI 3, n=6) but failed in 1 patient because recanalisation was not possible (TIMI 0). No intracranial haemorrhage or dissections occurred during treatment. The recanalised patients recovered consciousness within 9-27h after treatment. The median GCS score upon discharge was 14 (range 3-15). Three months later, 6 patients had a good outcome (modified Rankin Score (mRS) 0-2), and 2 patients had a moderate outcome (mRS 3). The patient who did not undergo recanalisation died in the rehabilitation hospital 21 days later. CONCLUSIONS: CDM may be a valid method for selecting patients with prolonged basilar artery occlusion (BAO) who are eligible for recanalisation treatment. ERT was feasible for patients with BAO. A good clinical outcome was achieved with successful recanalisation.