The objectives of this cross-sectional study were to evaluate the differences between males and females in the clinical and biochemical manifestations of primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (PAPS). The method involved 49 patients (38 premenopausal females and 11 males) diagnosed with PAPS (according to the Sapporo criteria) and their demographic data, clinical data, medications used and antiphospholipid antibodies were analyzed. The results of this study are as follows. Both the groups of patients were statistically similar regarding age, race, weight and body mass index. However, males were significantly taller than females (172 ± 8.9 vs. 159.2 ± 6.2 cm, p < 0.0001). The duration of disease was similar for females and males. The prevalence of pulmonary thromboembolism was higher in females than in males (34.2 vs. 0.0%, p = 0.024). Regarding other PAPS manifestations (arterial events, venous events, deep venous thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, acute myocardial infarction, angina, cerebrovascular accidents and Sneddon syndrome), comorbidities (arterial hypertension and dyslipidemia), lifestyle (physical activity, previous smoking and current smoking) and the use of medications (current and previous use of corticosteroids, as well as the use of statins or chloroquine), both groups were statistically similar (p > 0.05). More females than males tested positive for IgM anticardiolipin antibodies (76.3 vs. 36.4%, p = 0.025) or for at least one of the antiphospholipid antibodies tested (either IgM anticardiolipin or IgG anticardiolipin 84.2 vs. 45.5%, p = 0.016). However, both groups were similar regarding the frequency of positivity for lupus anticoagulant and isolated IgG anticardiolipin, as well as regarding mean levels of IgG and IgM anticardiolipin (p > 0.05). We concluded that, among PAPS patients, the frequency of pulmonary thromboembolism and of positivity for IgM anticardiolipin is higher in females than in males. Our findings show that there are gender differences in PAPS, differences that might be related to alterations in sex hormones.