BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to assess the consequences of severe spinothalamic tract lesions resulting from lateral medullary infarct and to show that a specific pain perception can be elicited by strong thermal stimulation. CASE DESCRIPTIONS: Both patients examined presented with severe thermoalgic dissociation of the limbs contralateral to the lesion, with normal discriminative somatosensory perception and motor strength. They reported pain perception when touching very warm (>50 degrees C to 60 degrees C) objects and a brisk, occasionally uncontrolled withdrawal reaction of the arm and hand under the same conditions, without any perception of the heat nature of the stimulus. Warm stimulation, <45 degrees C, elicited no thermal perception or discrimination. Pain perception could be elicited in both patients by increasing the temperature, with a reproducible threshold of 47 degrees C to 49 degrees C. Pain always occurred after a prolonged delay of 8 to 10 seconds in response to threshold heat, and was described as deep and osseous, and clearly different from that perceived on the nonaffected side. The delay was much shorter when the temperature was increased by 4 degrees C to 5 degrees C. Cold stimulation elicited similar pain perception in one patient. Analysis of subjective perception of laser stimulation showed a much higher pain threshold on the affected hand. There were no laser-evoked potentials on this side, which suggested major spinothalamic injury. Assessment of the RIII noxious reflex revealed persistent response withdrawal reactions, with an increased threshold on the affected side, and partial consciousness of the noxious nature of the stimulus. CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first description of the appearance of pain perception of high temperatures in patients with severe spinothalamic injury who are suffering from a complete loss of temperature perception. This implies that noxious thermal stimulation can still be perceived via extra spinothalamic pathways (which are slow and multisynaptic), such as the spinoreticulothalamic tract. Patients with Wallenberg syndrome should be informed and made aware of their residual perception of and reactions to noxious stimulation.