 INTRODUCTION: Previous reports have suggested that endovascular parent artery occlusion is an effective and safe procedure for the treatment of vertebral artery dissection (VAD). However, the results of long-term outcomes are still unclear. This study reviewed the clinical and imaging outcomes of patients with VAD treated by endovascular internal trapping. METHODS: A total of 73 patients were treated for VAD by endovascular internal trapping between March 1998 and March 2011. Patients were regularly followed up by magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance angiography, and clinical examinations. Clinical outcomes were evaluated using the modified Rankin Scale. RESULTS: Forty-five patients had ruptured VADs, and 28 had unruptured VADs. Clinical follow-up of at least 6 months data was obtained for 61 patients (83.6 %). The follow-up period ranged from 6 to 145 months (mean ± SD, 55.6 ± 8.9 months). Two patients with ruptured VADs had recurrence (2.74 %). Cranial nerve paresis (CNP) was observed in six patients (8.21 %), spinal cord infarction in two patients (2.74 %), and a perforating artery ischemia was diagnosed in seven patients (9.59 %); all patients with CNP and five of the patients with partial Wallenberg syndrome experienced only temporary symptoms; two of the patients with partial Wallenberg syndrome had permanent neurological deficits. Despite their symptoms, most patients were in good general condition, as shown by their clinical scores. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study have proven that endovascular internal trapping is a stable and durable treatment for closure of VADs. Recanalization is rather rare and occurred only in ruptured cases, both within 3 months after initial treatment without rupture. CNPs were observed in 8.21 %, perforating ischemia in 9.59 %, and spinal cord infarction in 2.74 %. The former two are temporary, while the last can be a factor that affects the modified Rankin Scale. Patients rated their quality of life as good, as corroborated by their posttreatment clinical score. Endovascular internal trapping for VAD is a therapy with a satisfactory long-term outcome.