The morphological features of centrotemporal spike discharges (CTSD) and relationship of them with clinical diagnosis in cases with benign epilepsy of childhood with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) and the other epileptic syndromes of childhood as well as some nonconvulsive neurological disorders were detected in the routine patient population who referred to the authors' EEG laboratory. Thirty-six cases (21 males, 15 females; 8 months-14 years old), in which awake and/or sleep EEGs revealed CTSD were included in this study. The cases were divided into two groups as epileptic and nonepileptic. The cases with seizure were divided into BECTS and the other epilepsies. Of the epileptic cases, 14 (38.8%) patients had typical rolandic seizures. In five cases, there were partial or secondary generalized seizures. Two cases had myoclonic seizures. In the nonepileptic group, there was mental retardation/behavioral disturbances in five cases; there were periodic syndromes of childhood such as migraine and equivalents of migraine in three cases; febrile convulsion in three cases, breath-holding spells in two cases, and primary enuresis nocturna in two cases. In the nonepileptic group, the discharges were significantly fewer than the other groups (p = .014). More frequent discharges occuring for shorter periods were more significantly observed in BECTS group (64%). Typically isolated spike and slow-waves in T3/T4 and C3/C4 location were significantly more common (86%) in rolandic epilepsy group (p = .01). The EEGs of cases with BECTS had more frequency in the cluster of discharges than the other groups (p = .018). Multifocal discharges were observed in 28.5% of cases with BECTS, in 20% of nonepileptic group, and in 71.4% of other epileptics in the trial. Although these epileptic and nonepileptic conditions have some differences in view of frequency and morphology and location, CTSDs could be manifested in the group without seizure. It was concluded that the similar focal abnormalities which could be seen in rolandic epilepsy may be observed in the other epileptic or nonepileptic disorders of childhood and this condition may be originated from the involvement of similar central structures.