The aim of this study was to investigate behavioral problems in two groups of children with benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS), i.e., those treated with antiepileptic drugs and those not treated in order to identify the factors associated with behavioral problems. MATERIAL AND METHODS. In total, 20 newly diagnosed untreated, 23 treated patients with BECTS, and 20 patients with acute/subacute peripheral nervous system disorders as a comparison group (aged 6-11 years) were examined. The evaluation was performed using the Lithuanian version of the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL). Schooling parameters, clinical parameters, EEG parameters, and their relation to the results of the CBCL were also investigated. RESULTS. The treated patients with BECTS had significantly higher scores in the subscales of Social Problems, Anxious/Depressed, Aggressive Behavior, and Attention Problems compared with the scores of the patients with peripheral nervous system disorders. A significant relationship was established between the scores of native language grades and Attention Problems; grades in mathematics and treatment duration; and age when the first seizure occurred and Delinquent Behavior in the group of treated patients. The duration of epilepsy was positively correlated with the scores in the subscales of Withdrawn and Delinquent Behavior. The presence of additional extrarolandic focus and spread of focal specific discharges to the centrofrontotemporal and centroparietotemporal areas were related to higher scores in Social Problems, Attention Problems, and Delinquent Behavior in the group of the treated patients with BECTS. CONCLUSIONS. Children with BECTS, especially those treated and with a longer epilepsy course, were found to be at risk of behavioral problems. Lower grades were associated with a longer disease course and medications. The presence of extrarolandic discharges was related to higher CBCL scores in the group of the treated patients with BECTS.