BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Revascularization surgery for moyamoya patients is believed to prevent cerebral ischemic attacks by improving cerebral blood flow. However, measures preventing the occurrence of hemorrhagic moyamoya in patients have not yet been established in the literature due to the low rate of hemorrhage onset as well as the originally limited numbers of patients with moyamoya disease, poor understanding of the clinical course of rebleeding, correct surgical management, and long-term outcome. We present here the results of an overall survey of patients with hemorrhagic moyamoya disease in a district of Miyagi Prefecture in Japan and examine their clinical course, efficacy of revascularization surgery, and long-term outcome. METHODS: This study included 28 moyamoya patients with episodes of intracranial hemorrhage between 1976 and 1988. The mean follow-up period was 14.2 years. There were 4 males and 24 females, aged 7 to 69 years (mean 39.2 years). Cerebral angiography and CT scans were performed for all patients. Surgical treatment was performed in 19 patients (67. 9%), and 10 patients (35.7%) underwent revascularization surgery. We observed the clinical course of all 28 patients. We also studied the relationship between the efficacy of surgical treatment and long-term outcome. RESULTS: Five of the 28 patients (17.9%) died of the initial intracranial hemorrhage, and 2 patients died of other causes. Rebleeding occurred in 6 of the remaining 21 patients (28. 6%). The interval to rebleeding ranged from 2 to 20 years (mean 7.3 years). Of these 6 patients, 4 died of rebleeding. Rebleeding was observed in 1 of 8 patients who underwent bypass surgery and in 5 of 13 patients who did not, which suggested that rebleeding was less likely to occur in patients who had undergone bypass surgery. However, there was no significant difference in rebleeding ratio or mortality between patients with and those without revascularization surgery (P>0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we compiled the results of meticulous follow-up conducted over the past 10 years for patients with hemorrhagic moyamoya disease. Because hemorrhagic moyamoya disease is known for its high rate of mortality at the time of rebleeding and often causes rebleeding long after the initial episode (as much as 20 years later), implementation of long-term preventive measures for rebleeding is necessary. This suggests that a long-term prospective study of a large number of patients with hemorrhagic moyamoya disease is required to determine whether bypass surgery prevents rebleeding of hemorrhagic moyamoya disease.