BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to examine the utility and reliability of arterial flow measurements made with a transit time ultrasonic flowmeter for monitoring blood flow changes during intracranial and carotid surgery. METHOD: A total of 25 patients underwent intra-operative arterial blood flow measurements. The pulsatile flow curve and mean flow values were obtained using 1- to 6-mm transit time probes with a dual channel flowmeter. Four cases underwent aneurysm clipping, 11 cases superficial temporal artery (STA)--middle cerebral artery (MCA) bypass, 2 cases external carotid artery (ECA)--radial artery--MCA bypass for aneurysm trapping, and 8 cases carotid endarterectomy. In aneurysm clipping, blood flow in the branches distal to the aneurysm was measured before and after clipping. Blood flow in the STA was measured before and after STA-MCA anastomosis, and blood flow in the internal carotid artery (ICA) cervical portion was measured during carotid endarterectomy. Blood flow in the MCA and STA was monitored during radial artery grafting. FINDINGS: Blood flow in the STA was elevated after STA-MCA anastomosis. However, post-operative hyperperfusion syndrome was found in some cases whose flow elevation was over 50 ml/min. Also in one case of carotid stenosis, of which blood flow of ICA was elevated to 400 ml/min after carotid endarterectomy, hyperperfusion syndrome was found after surgery. In the cases of MCA aneurysm clipping, decreasing of M2 flow was detected when clipping caused bifurcation stenosis. INTERPRETATION: We found transit time flow measurement useful for management of cerebrovascular surgery: the technique was simple to use and provided stable, reliable results. The method was able to reveal distal branch flow diminution in aneurysm clipping, or residual flow during temporary clipping in aneurysm surgery, and has the potential to predict post-operative complications such as hyperperfusion by signalling over-elevation of donor artery flow in bypass surgery or ICA flow in carotid surgery.