OBJECT: Moyamoya is a rare, chronic disease that leads to the progressive narrowing and/or occlusion of the distal internal carotid and proximal cerebral arteries. Chronic cerebral ischemia ensues due to insufficient collateral blood supply. One potential treatment consists of the restoration of regional cerebral blood flow by direct or indirect revascularization surgery. The extent of neovascularization, especially in indirect procedures such as encephalomyosynangiosis (EMS), is currently evaluated with conventional angiography. Because this method is invasive and carries some risks, the authors investigated power Doppler imaging as an alternative noninvasive bedside procedure that can be used to assess surgically induced indirect revascularization in adult patients with moyamoya disease. METHODS: Twelve symptomatic patients with adult moyamoya disease (seven women and five men, mean age 38 +/- 17 years) underwent combined (direct and indirect) revascularization. They were then examined using conventional angiography and power Doppler imaging to assess the extent of revascularization within 120 days postsurgery. According to the number of intracranial vessels demonstrating opacification on conventional angiography and power Doppler imaging studies, EMS was graded as follows: 1, absent (0 vessels); 2, moderate (one-four vessels); and 3, extensive (> four vessels) for both methods. Examiners were blinded to the classification results for the procedure that they did not grade. All 24 hemispheres were examined. The visual grading of EMS revealed a highly significant agreement between conventional angiography and power Doppler imaging (Spearman rank coefficient, r = 0.92; p < 0.001) and there was 100% agreement of patency of the bypass between the direct and indirect methods. CONCLUSIONS: The authors found excellent agreement between the two methods. Therefore, power Doppler imaging is a valid noninvasive alternative to carotid artery angiography in evaluating direct and indirect revascularization.