BACKGROUND: Superficial temporal artery-middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) anastomosis has been used to prevent stroke in patients with moyamoya disease (MD) and non-moyamoya ischaemic disease (non-MD). However, little is yet known regarding the difference between these groups of patients in the extent to which the bypass contributes to maintaining adequate cerebral blood oxygenation (CBO), or the temporal changes after surgery. In the present study, we evaluated the CBO changes induced by bypass blood flow in patients with MD and non-MD during the peri-operative periods employing optical spectroscopy. METHODS: We investigated 13 patients who underwent STA-MCA anastomosis, including 5 MD and 8 non-MD patients. We evaluated the effects of STA blood flow on the CBO in the MCA territory on the anastomosis side, employing visual light spectroscopy during surgery and near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) at one week after surgery. FINDINGS: In 4 MD patients and one non-MD patient, the STA blood flow increased the oxyhaemoglobin and cortical oxygen saturation (CoSO2), indicating that the bypass supplied blood flow to the ischaemic brain; the CBO changes were observed more frequently in MD than in non-MD patients (p<0.02). The pre-anastomosis CoSO2 (65.4+/-5.4%) in MD was significantly lower than that (72.8+/-7.6%) in non-MD (p<0.05). Postoperative NIRS demonstrated that the bypass began to supply blood flow to the brain in 5 non-MD patients whose bypass did not supply blood flow during surgery. CONCLUSIONS: Although MD has vessels of small diameter as compared to non-MD, the bypass begins to supply blood flow to the ischaemic brain earlier in MD than in non-MD after anastomosis. The fact that the CoSO2 in MD was lower than that in non-MD suggested that the perfusion pressure in MD was lower than that in non-MD, and this might account for the difference in the bypass blood supply after anastomosis between MD and non-MD. Our data suggest that, even if the bypass does not supply blood to the brain during surgery in non-MD, the bypass blood flow gradually increases after surgery.