OBJECT: Standard extracranial-intracranial (EC-IC) arterial bypass surgery represents a well-recognized procedure in which the aim is to augment distal cerebral circulation. The creation of the bypass requires temporary occlusion of the recipient vessel. Thus, there exists controversy about the risk of standard EC-IC arterial bypass surgery causing ischemic complications due to temporary vessel occlusion. In this prospective study, the incidence of intraoperative ischemia was investigated in symptomatic patients with steno-occlusive cerebrovascular disease and existing hemodynamic insufficiency. METHODS: Twenty consecutive patients (14 women and 6 men; mean age 46 +/- 11 years) suffering from recurrent transient ischemic attacks due to occlusive cerebrovascular disease and proven hemodynamic compromise in functional blood flow studies were enrolled in this study. The underlying pathological condition was internal carotid artery (ICA) or middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion in 6 cases and ICA or MCA stenosis in 3 cases, whereas 11 patients presented with moyamoya syndrome or moyamoya disease. The surgical procedure consisted of the establishment of a standard superficial temporal artery (STA)-MCA bypass, and was performed while a strict intraoperative management protocol was applied. Patients underwent clinical examination and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging within 48 hours before and after surgery. RESULTS: The incidence of reversible clinical signs of ischemia was 2 (10%) of 20 patients. Postoperative MR imaging revealed signs of diffusion disturbances in 2 (10%) of 20 cases. The observed diffusion-weighted imaging changes, however, were situated within the dependent vascular territory at risk for ischemia in 1 patient only. No permanent neurological deficit occurred. The temporary vessel occlusion time ranged between 25 and 42 minutes (mean 33 +/- 7 minutes). All means are expressed +/- the standard deviation. CONCLUSIONS: Temporary vessel occlusion during standard STA-MCA arterial bypass surgery carries a low risk of intraoperative ischemia when a strict perioperative management protocol is applied.