The risk of basal ganglia hemorrhage (BGH) increases in patients of older age and with hypertension. Current guidelines do not recommend routine vascular imaging. However, a proportion of patients with BGH have underlying vascular abnormalities, and these patients may require a different treatment approach. We aimed to assess the proportion of underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with BGH. In this retrospective study, we included all patients who presented with BGH between January 2007 and December 2009 at a single institution. The following data were collected: patient demographics, vascular risk factors, medications, volume of hematoma, CT scans, CT angiogram, magnetic resonance angiography and digital subtraction angiography. We determined the proportion of underlying vascular abnormalities and correlated these findings with risk factors for BGH. A total of 113 consecutive patients with BGH were identified, and vascular imaging was performed in 61. The median age was 62 years and 48 (78.7%) of these patients were male. Forty-two (68.9%) of 61 patients had hypertension. Positive vascular imaging findings were identified in eight of 61 patients (13.1%): three intracranial aneurysms, three cavernous malformations, one Moyamoya disease and one arteriovenous malformation. There were no significant associations between demographic features, vascular risk factors and the hematoma volume between patients with positive and negative vascular imaging. Specifically, an underlying vascular abnormality was not associated with age (≥ 60 years, 6/36 patients had an underlying vascular abnormality, compared with 2/25 patients< 60 years; p=not significant [n.s.]). There was no relationship with hypertension (5/42 hypertensive patients and 3/19 normotensive patients (n.s.) had an underlying vascular abnormality). We concluded that there is a significant proportion of relevant underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with BGH. This likelihood is not predicted by risk factors such as hypertension and age. These findings indicate the importance of vascular imaging in patients with BGH who are not neurologically devastated.