 OBJECTIVE: To explore the medium and long-term outcomes of patients with Moyamoya disease (MD) undergoing surgery and conservative treatment at a single institution and analyze the related prognostic factors. METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted for 97 MD patients at Beijing Tiantan Hospital from January 2000 to December 2007. They were divided into 3 groups according to treatments: superficial temporal artery-middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) anastomosis (n = 31), indirect vascular revascularization group (n = 38) and conservative treatment group (n = 28). The primary follow-up events included death, recurrent cerebral hemorrhage, new cerebral infarction and transient ischemic attack (TIA). RESULTS: All were available for analysis with the complete follow-up data. The average follow-up period of was 85 ± 38 months. In total, there were 6 deaths with all-cause mortality (6.1%). Among them, 5 (5.1%) patients died from recurrent cerebral hemorrhage. And 17 episodes of rebleeding occurred in 11 patients. Two episodes of intracranial hemorrhage were found in 4 patients. The risk of rebleeding was 17.5%. In the STA-MCA group, 23(74%) cases had excellent recovery, 5 cases fared worse and there was no death case. Among the patients undergoing indirect vascular revascularization, 28 cases recovered favorably, 4 cases progressed and 3 cases died. In the conservative treatment group, 17 patients recovered favorably, 7 progressed, 9 experienced 15 episodes of rebleeding and 3 died. Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that the method of treatment was an independent prognostic factor for MD and surgical revascularization was superior to conservative treatment. No correlation was found between the patient age, gender, familial history, unilateral or bilateral and prognosis (P > 0.05). Kaplan-Meier stroke risk analysis showed the risk of recurrent hemorrhage in the revascularization surgery group was lower than that in the conservative group. And no difference existed between STA-MCA and indirect arterial anastamoses. CONCLUSIONS: Rebleeding is a major cause of poor prognosis, mobility and mortality in MD patients. Surgical revascularization offers better long-term outcomes than conservative treatment. And direct arterial anastamoses may decrease recurrent hemorrhage effectively.