Moyamoya disease (MMD) and atherosclerotic cerebrovascular disease (ACVD) differ in angiographic appearance and probably hemodynamics. Pediatric MMD (PMMD) usually presents with cerebral ischemia, while intracranial hemorrhage is more common in adult MMD (AMMD), suggesting differences in cerebral hemodynamics. We analyzed the cortical flow velocity and direction of recipient arteries using micro-Doppler ultrasonography to evaluate the cortical circulation before and after anastomosis in MMD and ACVD. Twenty-eight patients with adult MMD (AMMD), 7 with pediatric MMD (PMMD), 16 with ACVD, and 12 control patients were studied. A micro-Doppler probe was applied on the cortical recipient artery (A4 or M4) before and after anastomosis. Systolic maximum flow velocity (V (max)) and blood flow direction were investigated at proximal and distal parts of anastomosed sites in recipient arteries. Pre- and postoperative regional cerebral blood flow was measured by cold xenon-computed tomography (Xe-CT). Before anastomosis, retrograde cortical flow was significantly more common in PMMD patients, and V (max) in cortical artery was significantly lower in AMMD patients. Bypass surgery changed the direction of blood flow from the anastomosis site to proximal and distal sites of the recipient artery in most patients, but pre-anastomosis flow direction was preserved more frequently in PMMD patients. The rate of V (max) increase after anastomosis was significantly higher in AMMD than in PMMD (11.6 ± 9.8 vs. 3.9 ± 1.8; P = 0.01). Micro-Doppler ultrasonography identified differences in cortical circulation among AMMD, PMMD, and ACVD. In AMMD, significantly low velocity in the cortical artery was observed before anastomosis, and bypass surgery reversed the flow and significantly increased flow velocity. The data of PMMD showed unique hemodynamics of the cortical artery before anastomosis, characterized by a higher frequency of retrograde flow and preserved velocity. The V (max) increase rate was significantly higher in patients with postoperative cerebral hyperperfusion on Xe-CT, and further study is warranted to validate the clinical use of intraoperative micro-Doppler monitoring to predict postoperative hyperperfusion.