Spontaneous occlusion of the circle of Willis, or cerebrovascular moyamoya disease, is characterised by occlusive or stenotic lesions at or around the terminal portions of the internal carotid arteries and abnormal vascular networks at the base of the brain.1 The obstructive lesions are caused by fibrous thickening of the intima with minimum lipid deposition, the internal elastic lamina is well preserved, and no substantial inflammatory cell infiltration is seen in the vascular wall. Reduced vasoreactivity of cerebral vessels was also reported in moyamoya disease, but its aetiology has not yet been clarified.2 We report here a case of variant angina pectoris associated with moyamoya disease.A 48-year-old man was referred to our hospital with chest pain at rest in March, 1997. There was a history of syncope, and he had been diagnosed as having moyamoya disease 1 year earlier. He was a smoker but had no hyperlipidaemia or diabetes mellitus. Physical and blood examinations, chest radiography, electrocardiography, and echocardiography were unremarkable. Exercise thallium scintigraphy showed no ischaemic areas. Electrocardiography during an episode of ischaemia revealed ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF, followed by complete atrioventricular block. Hyperventilation accompanied by hypocapnia provoked an ischaemic attack. Coronary angiography showed no significant stenotic lesions. A provocative test by intracoronary infusion of acetylcholine (50 &#x3bc;g) induced local occlusion of the middle portion of the right coronary artery with ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF. Based on the diagnosis of variant angina pectoris, calcium antagonists and nitrates were administered, and he has since had no further ischaemic attacks.Between 1981 and 1997, we examined nine patients with moyamoya disease (three men and six women) ranging in age from 18 to 70 years. Among these patients, two men including the present case had variant angina pectoris. There have been several reports of involvement of the extracranial vessels, especially the renal arteries, in moyamoya disease,3, 4 and 5 but no studies have provided evidence as to whether this disease affects the coronary artery. Our observations suggest that moyamoya disease should be regarded as a systemic vascular disorder, and evaluation of the extracerebral cardiovascular system is also required in this disease.