Most accepted operations for childhood moyamoya disease have attempted to increase cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the ischaemic cortical areas around the central fissure. Developed ischaemic brain damage in the prefrontal area may lead to poor intellectual outcome and restrict patients' daily lives. Thus, extensive cerebral revascularization in both the ischaemic anterior and middle cerebral artery territories is mandatory. We describe the long-term follow-up results for intellectual outcome and performance status and make an evaluation of regional cerebral haemodynamics after extensive omental transplantation spread over both frontal lobes performed as the initial management. In the past 10 years, 10 moyamoya patients less than 12 years of age consecutively underwent omental transplantation. The omental flap was spread over not only the symptomatic hemisphere but also the contralateral frontal lobe after a large craniotomy. Superficial temporal artery to middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) anastomosis was accomplished simultaneously. On the contralateral hemisphere, STA-MCA anastomosis combined with encephalomyosynangiosis was subsequently performed. The clinical observation period averaged 6.7 years (ranged 1.9 to 9.2 years). Apart from 2 patients in whom severe mental retardation had been disclosed pre-operatively, full-scale intelligence quotient scores have been maintained at over 90, that is, within the normal intellectual range. With respect to quality of life (QOL), these 8 patients have been leading normal daily lives since the operation. The focal decrease in CBF observed in the frontal lobe pre-operatively in 7 cases had disappeared after surgical treatment. In these patients, serial post-operative MR angiography revealed developed omental vessels and STAs. Deterioration of intellectual functions and QOL as well as cerebral ischaemic events in paediatric moyamoya patients can be prevented by extensive omental transplantation spread over both frontal lobes combined with STA-MCA anastomosis.