BACKGROUND: High density lipoproteins (HDL) are complex lipoprotein particles involved in reverse cholesterol (C) transport and are negatively associated with the risk for coronary artery disease (CAD). We have described a disorder of familial HDL deficiency (FHD) due to abnormal cellular cholesterol efflux. In the present study, we investigated cellular cholesterol efflux on skin fibroblast from 15 probands with moderate to severe hypoalphalipoproteinemia, including one subject with Tangier disease (TD). We performed family studies on eight of these probands (269 individuals) with familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia (defined as a HDL-C <5th%, and with no known cause of HDL deficiency). We have previously shown that four of our FHD patients and patients with TD have mutations at the ABC1 gene, demonstrating that FHD is a heterozygous form of TD. METHODS: On each subject, we carried out detailed biochemical analysis and determined apoA-I-mediated cellular cholesterol efflux using 3H-cholesterol labeled skin fibroblasts from study subjects compared with controls. TD has also been associated with abnormal cellular cholesterol efflux. Cell fusion experiments with polyethylene glycol (PEG) were carried out with fibroblasts from a subject with TD and one with FHD in order to determine whether the Tangier cells can complement the FHD defect. In all subjects with a reduced cellular cholesterol efflux, exons of the ABCA1 gene were sequenced. RESULTS: Familial forms of HDL deficiency, defined as HDL-C levels <5th percentile, are a heterogeneous group of lipoprotein disorders. A reduced cellular cholesterol efflux has been identified in eight subjects from seven kindred (7/14 or 50% of probands tested), being reduced by a mean 59% of controls (range 49-63%). In four of these subjects, a mutation at the ABCA1 gene locus was identified. In three other subjects an efflux defect was idenfified but no critical mutation at the ABCA1 gene locus has been identified. In the remaining subjects, (7/14), no efflux defect was identified. Complementation studies reveal that the FHD defect is not corrected by Tangier cells, confirming that FHD and TD represent a spectrum of the same genetic defect. CONCLUSION: Familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia syndromes are phenotypically heterogeneous; one form is associated with abnormal cellular cholesterol efflux caused by heterozygous mutations at the ABCA1 gene, that defines familial HDL Deficiency while homozygous mutations or compound heterozygocity causes TD. Other forms are primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia of unknown cause, while the remaining cases are associated with hypertriglyceridemia with or without elevated apoB levels. We conclude that a cellular cholesterol defect is a relatively frequent cause of familial HDL deficiency and that a mutation at the ABCA1 gene can be identified in half of these patients.