We investigated the genetic defects in two patients with familial lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) deficiency. Their clinical manifestations including corneal opacities, anemia, proteinuria, and hypoalphalipoproteinemia were identical for familial LCAT deficiency. Their LCAT activities and the cholesterol esterification rate (CER) were nearly zero, and their LCAT masses were below 10% of normal control values. Sequence analysis of the amplified DNA of case 1 revealed one base deletion of G at base 873 (first position of Val264) in exon 6, leading to a premature termination by frameshift. Sequence analysis of amplified DNA of case 2 revealed a single G to A converting Gly (GGT) to Ser (AGT) substitution at residue 344. When COS-1 cells were transfected with these mutants, LCAT activity in the medium was nearly zero, and the LCAT mass was undetectable (< 0.01 microgram/ml). In contrast, LCAT activity in the medium of COS-1 cells, transfected with wild-type LCAT, was 1.7 nmol/h per ml and the LCAT mass was 0.09 micrograms/ml. The LCAT mass in the cell lysates of the mutants was less than 12% of control for case 1 and 18% of control for case 2. Northern blot analysis of the mRNA of COS-1 cells transfected with the mutants showed the same amounts of LCAT mRNA as compared with wild-type LCAT. Biosynthesis of mutant LCATs was analyzed by pulse-chase and immunocytochemistry in transfected baby hamster kidney cells. SDS-PAGE/fluorography demonstrated that wild-type LCAT was synthesized as a high-mannose type of 56 kDa, which was very slowly converted to a mature form of 67 kDa and was secreted into the media. In contrast to the wild-type LCAT, the mutant precursors were not processed into the mature form but slowly degraded along with chase times. On steady and continuous labeling in the case of wild-type LCAT, the mature 67 kDa form was observed in both the cell lysate and media, whereas no mature form was detected in the cell lysates and media which were transfected mutant LCATs. These data suggest that the mutant LCATs are actually synthesized in an amount comparable to that of wild-type, but they are slowly degraded without being processed into the mature form. The immunocytochemistry revealed that mutant LCATs were mainly retained in the endoplasmic reticulum. These data suggest that these two mutations may disrupt the mutant LCATs' transport from the endoplasmic reticulum into Golgi apparatus, resulting in LCAT deficiency.