Fish-eye disease (FED) in humans is characterized by corneal opacities and markedly decreased plasma concentrations of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, apolipoprotein (apo) AI, and apo All, but no tendency to precocious atherosclerosis is present. To elucidate this paradox, the structure of HDL, the potential of serum to promote cholesterol efflux from cultured cells, and the in vivo metabolism of HDL were examined in a 53-year-old woman with a FED syndrome in association with a markedly decreased lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) activity in HDL due to a mutation of the LCAT gene (Arg158 --> Cys). HDLs isolated by ultracentrifugation were small and enriched in unesterified cholesterol and phospholipids at the expense of cholesteryl esters and proteins. The apolipoprotein content showed an enrichment in apo E and apo AIV, whereas apo AI and apo All were dramatically reduced. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and immunoblotting using specific antibodies showed that the apo E was free or covalently bound to apo All. These particles analyzed by electron microscopy were small and round lipoproteins with a size similar to the smallest fraction of normal HDL3. The potential capacity of the serum to promote efflux from the cells was approximately 40% of control serum levels, but FED HDLs were as efficient as control HDLs in promoting cholesterol efflux from cells. To assess the metabolism of HDL apolipoproteins, in vivo apolipoprotein kinetic studies were performed using endogenous labeling techniques in the patient with FED and three control subjects. All subjects were administered D3-labeled leucine by primed constant infusion for up to 10 hours. The fractional synthetic rates (FSRs) of apo AI and apo All in the patient were 0.674 and 0.594 per day, clearly higher than in controls, 0.210 +/- 0.053 and 0.148 +/- 0.014 per day for apo AI and apo All, respectively. Apo AI and apo All production rates in the patient with FED were normal, 11.32 and 2.62 mg/kg x d, respectively, as compared with those in normal subjects, 11.45 +/- 1.23 and 2.68 +/- 0.17 mg/kg x d. These data established that hypoalphalipoproteinemia in FED was caused by marked hypercatabolism of apo AI and apo All. This hypercatabolism could be the consequence of structural abnormalities due to the selective LCAT deficiency. In conclusion, two steps of reverse cholesterol transport, cholesterol efflux and apo-HDL metabolism, appeared particularly efficient. This efficiency could participate in the absence of premature atherosclerosis in FED patients as regards the low HDL level.