 BACKGROUND: Catheter ablation has become the first line of therapy in patients with symptomatic, recurrent, drug-refractory atrial fibrillation. However, catheter ablation of persistent atrial fibrillation is still a challenge. Various rather complex ablation strategies exist and their results are not very favorable. Therefore, the aim of our study was to evaluate a well-defined reasonable approach to catheter ablation of persistent atrial fibrillation. The strategy consisted of a circumferential pulmonary vein ablation in combination with a potential-guided segmental approach to achieve complete pulmonary vein isolation and a linear lesion at the roof of the left atrium. METHODS: A total of 43 patients (30 men, 13 women; mean age 55 years (SD ± 9 years)) with symptomatic persistent atrial fibrillation were enrolled in this study. All patients underwent catheter ablation of persistent atrial fibrillation using the above-mentioned approach (with the CARTO or the NAVX system). Additionally, catheter ablation of the mitral isthmus and the right atrial isthmus was performed in selected cases. In all patients, cardiac MRI or multi-detector spiral computed tomography was performed prior to the ablation procedure and a surface rendered model of the left atrium was created. After discharge, patients were scheduled for repeated visits at the arrhythmia clinic at 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after the ablation procedure. RESULTS: The ablation procedure could be performed as planned in all 43 patients. Nine patients had to undergo a repeat ablation procedure, so that a total of 52 procedures were evaluated. An additional linear lesion was created at the mitral isthmus in three patients (7%) during the initial procedure and in one patient (2.3%) during the second procedure. Catheter ablation of the right atrial isthmus was performed in 11 patients (25.6%) during the first procedure and in four additional patients during the redo procedure (9.3%). Twenty-four out of 43 patients (55.8%) experienced an arrhythmia recurrence within the first 3 months after ablation requiring an electrical cardioversion. At 1-year follow-up, analysis of a 7-day Holter monitoring revealed no evidence for an arrhythmia recurrence in 26 of 43 patients (60.5%). In nine of 43 patients (20.9%), only short episodes of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation were documented. In eight patients (18.6%), a recurrence of persistent atrial fibrillation (>48 h) was revealed by the long-term recordings. A duration of persistent atrial fibrillation >3 months was the most powerful predictor for arrhythmia recurrences at 1-year follow-up. A subgroup analysis revealed a markedly higher rate of stable sinus rhythm at 1-year follow-up in patients with a short duration of atrial fibrillation (≤ 3 months) compared to patients with a longer duration of AF (>3 months) prior to the procedure (72.0% versus 44.4%). There were no major complications. CONCLUSIONS: Catheter ablation of persistent atrial fibrillation can be performed safely and effectively using this ablation strategy (especially in patients with short-lasting persistent atrial fibrillation (≤ 3 months)).