 OBJECTIVE: The study aims to evaluate the safety and feasibility of intra-operative device closure of atrial septal defect with transthoracic minimal invasion. METHODS: From May 2006 to June 2009, 252 patients with secundum-type atrial septal defect closure were enrolled in our institution. The patients were divided into two groups, with 182 patients in group I with intra-operative device closure and 72 in group II with surgical closure. In group I, the patients' age ranged from 3 months to 62 years (mean±standard deviation, 19.0±16.7 years). This approach involved a transthoracic minimal invasion that was performed after full evaluation of the atrial septal defect by transthoracic echocardiography, deploying the device through the delivery sheath to occlude the atrial septal defect. RESULTS: In group I, 180 patients were occluded successfully under this approach. The size of the occluder device implanted ranged from 6 to 48 mm. Minor complications occurred, which included transient arrhythmias (n=23) and pleural effusion (n=15). Two patients with postoperative cardiac arrest were successfully cardiopulmonary resuscitated. Another two patients with occluder dislodged back into the right atrium were turned to surgical repair with cardiopulmonary bypass on the postoperative day. In group II, all patients were occluded successfully, and almost all patients needed blood transfusion and suffered from various minor complications. All discharged patients were followed up for 1-5 years. During this period, we found no recurrence, no thrombosis, even no device failure. In our comparative studies, group II had significantly longer intensive care unit (ICU) stay and hospital stay than group I (p<0.05). The cost for group I was less than group II (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Intra-operative device closure of atrial septal defect with transthoracic minimal invasion is a safe and feasible technique. It had the advantages of cost savings, yielding better cosmetic results, and leaving less trauma than surgical closure.