 OBJECTIVES: This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of flecainide in addition to conventional drug therapy in patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT). BACKGROUND: CPVT is an inherited arrhythmia syndrome caused by gene mutations that destabilize cardiac ryanodine receptor Ca(2+) release channels. Sudden cardiac death is incompletely prevented by conventional drug therapy with β-blockers with or without Ca(2+) channel blockers. The antiarrhythmic agent flecainide directly targets the molecular defect in CPVT by inhibiting premature Ca(2+) release and triggered beats in vitro. METHODS: We collected data from every consecutive genotype-positive CPVT patient started on flecainide at 8 international centers before December 2009. The primary outcome measure was the reduction of ventricular arrhythmias during exercise testing. RESULTS: Thirty-three patients received flecainide because of exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias despite conventional (for different reasons, not always optimal) therapy (median age 25 years; range 7 to 68 years; 73% female). Exercise tests comparing flecainide in addition to conventional therapy with conventional therapy alone were available for 29 patients. Twenty-two patients (76%) had either partial (n = 8) or complete (n = 14) suppression of exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias with flecainide (p < 0.001). No patient experienced worsening of exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias. The median daily flecainide dose in responders was 150 mg (range 100 to 300 mg). During a median follow-up of 20 months (range 12 to 40 months), 1 patient experienced implantable cardioverter-defibrillator shocks for polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias, which were associated with a low serum flecainide level. In 1 patient, flecainide successfully suppressed exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias for 29 years. CONCLUSIONS: Flecainide reduced exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias in patients with CPVT not controlled by conventional drug therapy.