Myocardial hypertrophy has been linked to the development of a variety of cardiovascular diseases, and is a risk factor for myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias, and sudden cardiac death. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the cardioprotective effects of Danshensu (DSS), a water-soluble active component of Danshen, on cardiac hypertrophy in rats. We are the first to report that DSS reversed Cx43 down-regulation in ventricular tissue. Cardiomyopathy in rats was produced using isoproterenol (Iso) treatment (2.5 mg/kg/d, s.c.) for seven days. DSS (3 and 10 mg/kg/d, i.p.) and Valsartan (Val) (10 mg/kg, i.g.) were administered on days 4-7 of Iso-treatment. Heart weight index, hemodynamic parameters, and ECG II parameters were monitored and recorded; protein expression of left ventricular connexin 43 (Cx43) and the activity of the redox system were assayed, and arrhythmias were produced using a coronary ligation/reperfusion procedure. The results demonstrated that DSS treatment significantly decreased heart weight/body weight (HW/BW) and left ventricular weight/body weight (LVW/BW) ratios. The protective role of DSS against Iso-induced myocardial hypertrophy was further confirmed using ECG. The incidences of ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation (VT, VF) and arrhythmic scores were higher in the model group and were suppressed by DSS. DSS decreased the serum and myocardium levels of creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and malondialdehyde (CK, LDH, and MDA) and increased serum activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) in a dose-dependent manner. Cx43 expression in the left ventricle was down-regulated, and there was significant oxidative stress in this model of cardiomyopathy. DSS reversed the down-regulated Cx43 protein levels and showed potent anti-oxidative activities and cellular protection. These data demonstrate that DSS can prevent cardiac I/R injury and improve cardiac function in a rat model of hypertrophy, the effects partially resulting from antioxidants and the protection from Cx43 expression.