 OBJECTIVE: Outcomes data for adults undergoing congenital heart surgery are limited. Previous analyses used administrative data or focused on single-center outcomes. We describe the most common operations, patient characteristics, and postoperative outcomes using a multicenter clinical database. METHODS: The study included adults (aged ≥ 18 years) listed in the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database (2000-2009). We describe patient characteristics and morbidity and mortality, and examine congenital procedures in the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac Surgery Database to permit consideration of the primary dataset within a broader context. RESULTS: A total of 5265 patients (68 centers) from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database were included. Patients' median age was 25 years (interquartile range, 20-35). Common preoperative risk factors included noncardiac abnormalities (17%) and arrhythmia (14%). Overall, in-hospital mortality was 2.1%, 27% had 1 or more complication, and median length of stay was 5 days. Common operations included right ventricular outflow tract procedures (21%) and pacemaker/arrhythmia procedures (20%). We further evaluated cardiopulmonary bypass procedures in more than 100 patients. Mortality ranged from 0% (atrial septal defect repair) to 11% (Fontan revision/conversion). Separate evaluation of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac Surgery Database revealed 39,872 adults undergoing congenital heart operations. CONCLUSIONS: Most adult congenital heart operations listed in the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database are performed in the third to fourth decades of life; approximately half are for right heart pathology or arrhythmia. Many patients have complications, but mortality is low with the exception of those undergoing Fontan revision/conversion. Many more adults undergoing congenital heart surgery are entered into the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac Surgery Database.