 UNLABELLED: Differential diagnosis of symptomatic events in post-ablation atrial fibrillation (AF) patients (pts) is important; in particular, accurate, reliable detection of AF or atrial flutter (AFL) is essential. However, existing remote monitoring devices usually require attached leads and are not suitable for prolonged monitoring; moreover, most do not provide sufficient information to assess atrial activity, since they generally monitor only 1-3 ECG leads and rely on RR interval variability for AF diagnosis. A new hand-held, wireless, symptom-activated event monitor (CardioBip; CB) does not require attached leads and hence can be conveniently used for extended periods. Moreover, CB provides data that enables remote reconstruction of full 12-lead ECG data including atrial signal information. We hypothesized that these CB features would enable accurate remote differential diagnosis of symptomatic arrhythmias in post-ablation AF pts. METHODS: 21 pts who underwent catheter ablation for AF were instructed to make a CB transmission (TX) whenever palpitations, lightheadedness, or similar symptoms occurred, and at multiple times daily when asymptomatic, during a 60 day post-ablation time period. CB transmissions (TXs) were analyzed blindly by 2 expert readers, with differences adjudicated by consensus. RESULTS: 7 pts had no symptomatic episodes during the monitoring period. 14 of 21 pts had symptomatic events and made a total of 1699 TX, 164 of which were during symptoms. TX quality was acceptable for rhythm diagnosis and atrial activity in 96%. 118 TX from 10 symptomatic pts showed AF (96 TX from 10 pts) or AFL (22 TX from 3 pts), and 46 TX from 9 pts showed frequent PACs or PVCs. No other arrhythmias were detected. Five pts made symptomatic TX during AF/AFL and also during PACs/PVCs. CONCLUSIONS: Use of CB during symptomatic episodes enabled detection and differential diagnosis of symptomatic arrhythmias. The ability of CB to provide accurate reconstruction of 12 L ECGs including atrial activity, combined with its ease of use, makes it suitable for long-term surveillance for recurrent AF in post-ablation patients.