 OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare the requirement for temporary and permanent pacemaker insertion and the incidence of the problems regarding the rhythm following heart transplantation with the bicaval or biatrial technique in the early postoperative period. METHODS: Sixty-one patients underwent orthotopic heart transplantation between the dates of September 1989 and December 2008 in our clinics were included to the study. The study was designed as retrospective analysis, and all data were collected from hospital records. The transplantation was performed by using standard biatrial method in 28 of the patients, by using bicaval anastomosis method in 33 of the patients. Statistical analyses were performed using Chi-square, Fischer's exact and Mann-Whitney U tests. Predictors of temporary and permanent pacemaker insertion were analyzed using logistic regression analysis. RESULTS: In the biatrial group, the temporary pacemaker requirement (p<0.05), left bundle branch block (LBBB) (p<0.01) and atrioventricular block (AV block) (p<0.05) were observed statistically significantly more than in bicaval anastomosis group. In addition, in the biatrial group, one patient needed implantation of permanent pacemaker and one patient-implantable cardioverter defibrillator. On the postoperative echocardiographic evaluation, in the patients operated with the bicaval technique, the tricuspid (p<0.01) and mitral insufficiency (p<0.01) were observed significantly less. In the logistic regression analysis, hypertension (OR: 1.053, 95% CI: 1.019-1.176, p<0.05), donor age (OR: 1.016, 95% CI: 1.023-1.038, p<0.05) and application of the operation with the biatrial technique (OR: 10.287, 95% CI: 1.298-91.278, p<0.01) were determined as the risk factors requiring the temporary pacemaker usage. In the bicaval group, arrhythmia (ventricular and atrial premature beats) and atrioventricular valve insufficiency were observed less, the rhythm returned to normal in an earlier period. CONCLUSION: Biatrial surgical technique, donor age and hypertension were determined as significant predictors of temporary pacemaker insertion in the orthotopic heart transplantation. Atrioventricular block, left bundle branch block, and arrhythmia frequency was significantly less in the bicaval group. In terms of factors affecting morbidity, the bicaval technical results were found superior than biatrial technique.