 OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to assess the experience of a high-volume centre with thoracolaparoscopy radical oesophagectomy and to evaluate the feasibility, tumour clearance, the learning curve and reproducibility of this technique. METHODS: Eighty patients with thoracic oesophageal cancer who underwent thoracolaparoscopic oesophagectomy (TLE) were enrolled in this study. Two attending surgeons (Mingqiang Kang and Ruobai Lin) independently performed the procedure as operating surgeons. The 60 patients who had surgery performed on them by the senior attending surgeon, Mingqiang Kang, were divided into three groups of 20 patients: groups A, B and C. The results from the three groups were compared in order to detect any changes in the success of TLE as a way of monitoring the development of the surgeon's technical skill. Another 20 patients had surgery performed on them by the new attending surgeon, Ruobai Lin, and were classified into the fourth group, D. The results from Group D were compared with those of the other three groups to evaluate the reproducibility of our technique. RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the four groups with respect to age, gender, location of tumour or staging. The duration of both the thoracoscopic and laparoscopic procedures was significantly longer in Group A. The amount of estimated blood loss was significantly more in Group A than in the other groups. The number of lymph nodes dissected was similar in Groups A and D, whereas that of retrieved nodes was larger in Groups B and C. There was no significant difference in the incidence of respiratory complications, recurrent nerve palsy, anastomotic leaks, arrhythmia, chylothorax and delayed gastric emptying among the four groups. CONCLUSIONS: When TLE procedures are started in units with a large volume of oesophageal resections, and when there is support from colleagues within the unit, transition from open to TLE can be achieved safely, with a satisfactory oncological outcome. A plateau of TLE skill was reached after 40 cases had been performed. If mini-fellowship training with supervision from senior surgeons is used, it is possible for a new attending surgeon to attain the requisite basic skill to perform TLE in a relatively short period of time.