 OBJECTIVES: The present study was conducted to evaluate the cardioprotective effect of sevoflurane compared with propofol in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) undergoing peripheral vascular surgery; and to address the question whether a volatile anesthetic might improve cardiac outcome in these patients. METHODS: One hundred twenty-six patients scheduled for elective peripheral vascular surgery were prospectively randomized to receive either sevoflurane inhalation anesthesia or total intravenous anesthesia. ST-segment monitoring was performed continuously during intra- and post-operative 48 h periods. The number of ischemic events and the cumulative duration of ischemia in each patient were recorded. Blood was sampled in all patients for the determination of cTnI. Samples were obtained before the induction of anesthesia, on admission to the ICU, and at 6, 12, 24, and 48 h after admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). Patients were followed-up during their hospital stay for any adverse cardiac events. RESULTS: The incidence of ischemia were comparable among the groups [16 (25%) patients in sevoflurane group vs 24 (39%) patients in propofol group; P=0.126]. Duration, cumulative duration, and magnitude of ST-segment depression of ischemic events in each patient were significantly less in sevoflurane group (P=0.008, 0.048, 0.038, respectively). cTnI levels of the overall population were significantly less in sevoflurane group vs propofol group (P values <0.0001) from 6 h postoperative and onward. Meanwhile, cTnI levels at 6, 12, 24, and 48 h after admission to the ICU in patients who presented with ischemic electrocardiographic (ECG) changes were significantly lower in sevoflurane group than in the propofol group (P<0.0001, <0.0001, <0.0001, 0.0003). None of the patients presented with unstable angina, myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, or serious arrhythmia either during ICU or hospital stay. CONCLUSION: Patients with CAD receiving sevoflurane for peripheral vascular surgery had significantly lower release of cardiac troponin I at 6 h postoperatively and lasting for 48 h than patients receiving propofol for the same procedure with significant decrease in duration, cumulative duration of ischemic events, and degree of ST depression in each patient.