 BACKGROUND: Dronedarone is a therapy for the treatment of patients with paroxysmal and persistent atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter. According to results in the ATHENA trial, dronedarone on top of standard of care (SOC) decreases the risk of cardiovascular hospitalizations or death by 24% compared with SOC alone. OBJECTIVES: A patient-level health economic model was developed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of dronedarone on top of SOC versus SOC alone. METHODS: The risk of experiencing stroke, congestive heart failure, acute coronary syndromes, treatment discontinuation, and death was modeled by separate health states, whereas adverse events were included as 1-time cost and utility decrements. State transition probabilities were primarily deduced from the patient-level data from ATHENA using survival analysis. Four sets of analyses were performed to reflect costs and treatment effects in Canada, Italy, Sweden, and Switzerland. Cost-effectiveness analysis was also conducted in a newly defined patient population identified by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) to avoid the use of dronedarone in permanent AF patients resembling those in the PALLAS study. RESULTS: The predicted survival time was, for the Canadian cohort, extended from 10.11 to 10.24 years when dronedarone was added to SOC. Similar results were found for the other countries, resulting in incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) of €5828, €5873, €14,970, and €8554 per QALYs for Canada, Italy, Sweden, and, Switzerland, respectively. These results are all well below current established cost-effectiveness thresholds. In the EMA-restricted population, all patients were predicted to live longer, and the ICER increased but remained within established thresholds, with an average cost per QALY gained of €15,900. CONCLUSIONS: Dronedarone on top of SOC appears to be a cost-effective treatment for atrial fibrillation compared with SOC alone. Despite the differences in the local settings considered, the results were consistent among all the countries included in the study. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00174785.