 INTRODUCTION: Although warfarin has traditionally been used for reducing risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, over the past year, the direct thrombin inhibitor dabigatran has become an accepted alternative. No study has conclusively investigated bleeding risks of patients treated with dabigatran immediately following radiofrequency catheter ablation (RFCA) procedures. METHODS: We evaluated 156 consecutive patients referred for RFCA of atrial arrhythmias: 31 patients were on dabigatran and 125 patients were on warfarin. The incidence of bleeding complications during the first 48 h and the first week following ablation were recorded and comparisons made using Fisher's exact test. Major complications were defined as hemorrhage requiring blood products or the need for vascular intervention. Minor complications were defined as prolonged bleeding from the catheter insertion site, hematoma formation, or development of ecchymosis. Our study also took into account the intraprocedure activated clotting time (ACT) levels in an effort to describe any differences between both patient groups. RESULTS: There were no differences in age, gender, procedure type, or level of intraprocedural anticoagulation between the warfarin and dabigatran groups. No major bleeding complications were observed in either patient group at either 48 h or 1 week postprocedure. Six of the 31 dabigatran patients and 21 of the 125 warfarin patients had minor bleeding complications. There was no statistically significant difference between the incidence of minor bleeding complications between the two groups (p = 0.7384), although rebleeding was more commonly observed in patients on dabigatran. In regard to the intraprocedure ACT levels, there was more variability in the dabigatran patient group, and it was more difficult to achieve the goal ACT level, yet these results did not affect overall bleeding complications. CONCLUSION: In our cohort, bleeding-related complications 48 h and 1 week post-ablation were similar for warfarin and dabigatran. Dabigatran is associated with more intraprocedural variability in ACT than warfarin.