In vitro experiments have shown that the upregulation of small-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) (SK) channels in ventricular epicardial myocytes is responsible for spontaneous ventricular fibrillation (VF) in failing ventricles. However, the role of SK channels in regulating VF has not yet been described in in vivo acute myocardial infarction (AMI) animals. The present study determined the role of SK channels in regulating spontaneous sustained ventricular tachycardia (SVT) and VF, the inducibility of ventricular tachyarrhythmias, and the effect of inhibition of SK channels on spontaneous SVT/VF and electrical ventricular instability in AMI rats. AMI was induced by ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery in anesthetized rats. Spontaneous SVT/VF was analyzed, and programmed electrical stimulation was performed to evaluate the inducibility of ventricular tachyarrhythmias, ventricular effective refractory period (VERP), and VF threshold (VFT). In AMI, the duration and episodes of spontaneous SVT/VF were increased, and the inducibility of ventricular tachyarrhythmias was elevated. Pretreatment in the AMI group with the SK channel blocker apamin or UCL-1684 significantly reduced SVT/VF and inducibility of ventricular tachyarrhythmias (P < 0.05). Various doses of apamin (7.5, 22.5, 37.5, and 75.0 μg/kg iv) inhibited SVT/VF and the inducibility of ventricular tachyarrhythmias in a dose-dependent manner. Notably, no effects were observed in sham-operated controls. Additionally, VERP was shortened in AMI animals. Pretreatment in AMI animals with the SK channel blocker significantly prolonged VERP (P < 0.05). No effects were observed in sham-operated controls. Furthermore, VFT was reduced in AMI animals, and block of SK channels increased VFT in AMI animals, but, again, this was without effect in sham-operated controls. Finally, the monophasic action potential duration at 90% repolarization (MAPD(90)) was examined in the myocardial infarcted (MI) and nonmyocardial infarcted areas (NMI) of the left ventricular epicardium. Electrophysiology recordings showed that MAPD(90) in the MI area was shortened in AMI animals, and pretreatment with SK channel blocker apamin or UCL-1684 significantly prolonged MAPD(90) (P < 0.05) in the MI area but was without effect in the NMI area or in sham-operated controls. We conclude that the activation of SK channels may underlie the mechanisms of spontaneous SVT/VF and susceptibility to ventricular tachyarrhythmias in AMI. Inhibition of SK channels normalized the shortening of MAPD(90) in the MI area, which may contribute to the inhibitory effect on spontaneous SVT/VF and inducibility of ventricular tachyarrhythmias in AMI.