ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Cardiac sarcoidosis (CS) is known to be associated with congestive heart failure, conduction disorders, and tachyarrhythmias. Ventricular arrhythmias are the most feared cardiac manifestation; they are often unpredictable, may be the first manifestation of the disease and may be fatal. The propensity for the development of supraventricular arrhythmias (SVA) in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis has not been described. The aim of this study was to assess the prevalence as well as predictors of SVA. METHODS: We retrospectively investigated 100 patients with biopsy-proven systemic sarcoidosis and evidence of cardiac involvement (defined by cardiac biopsy, positron emission tomography or cardiac MRI). The mean follow-up was 5.8±3.6 years. ECG, Holter, ICD interrogations and/or electrophysiology studies were used to document SVA. Echocardiographic data, demographics, extracardiac involvement were recorded and univariate and Poisson regression were performed to compare characteristics of patients with and without documented SVA. RESULTS: The prevalence of SVA was 32% and atrial fibrillation was the most common arrhythmia comprising 18% of the total burden, followed by atrial tachycardias 7%, atrial flutter 5%, and 2% other SVTs. Of the patients with SVA, 96% were symptomatic. Left atrial enlargement (LAE) was more frequent in the group of patients with SVA with an incidence of 267.8 per 1,000 person-years and it significantly increased the likelihood of SVA on multivariate analysis (RR: 6.12; 95% confidence interval: 2.19-17.11). Diastolic dysfunction, systemic hypertension, right atrial enlargement (RAE) were also predictors of SVA on univariate analysis. LV hypertrophy, RV dysfunction, tricuspid valve disease, pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary sarcoidosis were not associated with SVA on univariate analysis. CONCLUSION: Our study systematically evaluates the frequency of SVA in a large number of patients with CS. SVA in patients with CS is frequent and associated with symptoms. LAE was clearly associated with the development of SVA in our patient population. The extent to which LAE predicts the occurrence of SVA in larger more diverse CS populations should be evaluated prospectively.