 INTRODUCTION: The aim of our study was to evaluate the influence of ultrasonographic and fluoroscopic navigation on the rate of procedural and early complications during central venous cannulation. MATERIAL AND METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated procedural and early complications in patients who had undergone central venous cannulation under sonographic and fluoroscopic control within a two year period (from January 2010 to December 2011). We studied procedural and early complications (within 24 hours after the procedure). We summarized all cases of pneumothorax, haemothorax and haematoma of soft tissue larger than 5 cm in long axis, and other severe complications e.g. ardiac arrhythmias or hypotension. The set of patients indicated for central venous cannulation included mainly oncological patients who were implanted central venous port systems, and a small group of patients who were cannulated either at the intensive care unit (ICU) or at the department of anesthesiology after unsuccessful blind cannulation. There were three patients cannulated because of transjugular liver biopsy. RESULTS: We cannulated 165 patients under sonographic control within two years. There were 66 men, the mean age of 58.6 years (20-82) and 99 women, the mean age of 58.3 years (36- 94). We cannulated internal jugular vein 148 times and subclavian vein 17 times. The primary technical success was 100% in our study group. Totally, we had 6 complications (3.6%). Immediatelly after the procedure we observed two pneumothoraxes (1.2%) which did not require chest drainage. We punctured artery wall three times, but without haematoma developement, and after a ten-minute commpression, all procedures were successfully finished. We had serious vagal reaction during the cannulation in one patient. We had no fatal procedural complication in our group. There are significantly fewer complications using jugular approach compared to subclavian one. CONCLUSION: We conclude that the ultrasonographic central venous cannulation is a very safe method with a low risk of procedural and early complications. There were significantly fewer complications in case of jugular cannulation compared to subclavian approach in our group of patients. Ultrasonographically navigated central venous cannulation should be used more fequently in emergency medicine as well as in case of non-acute central venous cannulation performed a tan intensive care unit or by anesthesiologists.