 PURPOSE: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common type of arrhythmia following elective off-pump coronary bypass graft (CABG) surgery, occurring on the 2(nd) or 3(rd) postoperative day. Postoperative atrial fibrillation and early complications may be the cause of long term morbidity and mortality after hospital discharge. High sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP) seems to be most significantly associated with cardiovascular disorders. This study was designed to evaluate whether preoperative hsCRP (≥3 mg/dl) can predict post-elective off-pump CABG, AF, and early complications in patients with severe left ventricle dysfunction (Ejection Fraction (EF)<30%). METHODS: This study was conducted on 104 patients with severe left ventriclar dysfunction (EF < 30%), undergoing elective off-pump CABG surgery during April to September 2011 at the Afshar Cardiovascular Center in Yazd, Iran. Patients undergoing emergency surgery and those with unstable angina, creatinine higher than 2.0 mg/dl, malignancy, or immunosuppressive disease were excluded from the study. The subjects were divided into two groups: Group I with preoperative increased hsCRP (>3 mg/dl) (n=51) and group N with preoperative normal hsCRP (<3 mg/dl) (n=53). We evaluated post-CABG variables including incidence, duration, and frequency of AF, early morbidity (bleeding, infection, vomiting, renal and respiratory dysfunctions), ICU or hospital stay and early mortality. Data were then analyzed by Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), Chi-square and Fisher exact test for quantitative and qualitative variables. RESULTS: The average age of the patients was 62.5 years, 75 cases (72.1%) were male, and 39 (37.5%) were female. Postoperative AF occurred in 19 cases (18.2%); 17 cases (33.3%) had hsCRP≥3 mg/dl and 2 cases (3.8%) had hsCRP≤3 mg/dl (P=0.03). Postoperative midsternotomy infection, respiratory dysfunction, and hospital stay were significantly higher in group I compared with group N (P<0.05). No statistical significant differences were identified between the two groups concerning other postoperative complications (bleeding, vomiting, renal dysfunction and ICU stay) (P>0.05). CONCLUSION: Preoperative hsCRP ≥3 mg/dl can predict incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation and early complications such as midsternotomy infection, respiratory dysfunction, and hospital stay following elective off-pump CABG.