 BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) and atrial flutter (AFL) often coexist. In some patients, AF remission is seen after successful percutaneous radiofrequency current ablation of the cavotricuspid isthmus (CTI). AIM: To evaluate factors affecting AF remission in patients with typical AFL and concomitant AF who underwent CTI ablation. METHODS: The study included consecutive 69 patients with typical AFL and concomitant clinically documented AF who underwent successful CTI ablation in 2003-2010. Based on the follow-up data from medical records and telephone interviews, the patients were divided into two groups: with persistent AF (group A) and with remission of AF (group B). This distinction was based on arrhythmia symptoms reported by the patient, such as palpitation or irregular heartbeat, and confirmed electrocardiographically (12-lead ECG or Holter monitoring). RESULTS: Group A included 47 patients, and group B included 22 patients. The two groups did not differ significantly in regard to the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class and concomitant diseases including diabetes, ischaemic heart disease, previous myocardial infarction and arterial hypertension. The two groups also did not differ by echocardiographically determined mean left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and left atrial dimension (43.5 ± 9.27 vs. 39.27 ± 5.76, p = 0.075). Multivariate logistic regression did not identify any independent risk factors of AF persistence after CTI ablation. Univariate logistic regression also did not show arterial hypertension, type 2 diabetes, previous myocardial infarction, LVEF, left ventricular dimension or age to affect AF persistence after successful ablation. CONCLUSIONS: Based on the results of our study, we were unable to identify factors determining remission of AF coexisting with AFL in patients after percutaneous CTI ablation. These findings may indicate the need for complex ablation procedure (involving both CTI and pulmonary venous ostia ablation) in patients in whom these two arrhythmias coexist.