Up to 2008, dopamine was the catecholamine that was the most recommended in our intensive care unit (ICU) after fluid resuscitation. However, recently, norepinephrine has become the catecholamine that was most recommended in our ICU after fluid resuscitation. The aim of this study was to determine if there was an efficacy or safety benefit to this protocol therapeutic change in patients with shock admitted to our ICU. The primary outcome variable was ICU mortality. This is a prospective observational study conducted in 2 periods in our ICU (Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia). During the 2 study periods, 251 patients were included. There were 130 patients in group 1 and 121 patients in group 2. There were no significant differences between the 2 groups with regard to most of the baseline characteristics. The comparison between the 2 groups showed that in the first period, dopamine was the catecholamine that was the most used. However, in the second period, norepinephrine is the catecholamine that was most used. When we analyzed the catecholamine prescription in septic shock, we concluded that in the first study period, dopamine was used as the catecholamine as the first choice in 85.7% of cases (P < 0.001), and norepinephrine is the first choice in 100% of cases in the second period. In cardiogenic shock, in the first study period, dobutamine was used as the catecholamine as the first choice in 61% of cases (P < 0.001) and norepinephrine is the first choice in 43% of cases in the second period. Finally, in hypovolemic shock, dopamine was used as the catecholamine as the first choice in 68% of cases in group 1 and norepinephrine is the first choice in 88% of cases in the second period (P < 0.001). During the ICU stay, some adverse events related to catecholamine use were observed. The occurrence of arrhythmias was significantly more frequent in the first group. Mortality rate was at 51% in the first group and 44% in the second group (P = 0.27). The mortality rate was not significantly different for each type of shock (septic, cardiogenic, and hypovolemic) in both groups (P > 0.05 for all), although the occurrence of arrhythmias was significantly more frequent in the first group, in clinical practice, our study confirms that the rate of death did not differ significantly between the 2 groups of patients mostly treated with dopamine (group 1) and the group mostly treated with norepinephrine.