A 52-year-old black woman presented with a 2-day history of lower lip swelling 5 days after starting a new medication, lisinopril. She had never experienced similar episodes in the past. She denied shortness of breath, tightening of the throat, swelling of the tongue, generalized cutaneous eruption, urticaria, or pruritus. She also denied symptoms consistent with facial paresis. Her past medical history was significant for hepatitis C infection, coronary artery disease, and hypertriglyceridemia. She had a 15 pack-year smoking history and denied both alcohol and drug abuse. She had never received a blood transfusion and was HIV negative. Physical examination disclosed a tender, swollen, and erythematous lower lip with induration, oozing, and crusting (Figure 1). Pinpoint openings evident throughout the lip surface exuded a clear, sticky, mucoid secretion. Tongue, parotid glands, and regional lymph nodes were normal. The working diagnosis was angioedema secondary to lisinopril. The presumptive offending drug was discontinued, and conservative therapy (topical clobetasol ointment, oral ranitidine, and oral fexofenadine) was initiated. Despite treatment, signs and symptoms persisted unabated. One week after initial presentation, a punch biopsy of her lower lip was taken to rule out granulomatous cheilitis and sarcoidosis. Histopathology included diffuse lymphohistiocytic infiltrate, minimal microabscess formation, and notable absence of granulomata. There was neither hypertrophy nor detectable abnormality of the salivary glands, with the exception of infiltrating mononuclear cells. Based on the clinical history and compatible pathologic findings, a diagnosis of cheilitis glandularis was made. Specifically, crusting and erosion clinically suggested a diagnosis of the superficial suppurative subtype of cheilitis glandularis. The patient received oral penicillin (dicloxacillin, 1.0 g/d) combined with oral fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin, 1.0 g/d). Within 2 weeks of starting the antibiotics, the lip swelling significantly decreased (Figure 2) and the patient was left with a mildly indurated nodule at the labial commissure. Following a 4-week course of continued antibiotic treatment, the lip returned to near baseline state. At both 6-month and 1-year follow-up visits, the lip remained normal.