OBJECT: The aim of this study was to describe six variations of the extreme-lateral craniocervical approach, their application, and treatment results. METHODS: During a 4-year period 69 patients underwent surgery in which six variations of the extreme-lateral craniocervical approach were performed. The variations included: the transfacetal approach (TFA), performed to treat four lesions in the upper cervical spine anterior or anterolateral to the spinal cord; the retrocondylar approach, to treat five intradural lesions located anterolateral to the medulla oblongata and six vascular lesions to expose the extradural segment of the vertebral artery (VA); the partial transcondylar approach (PTCA), to treat 18 intradural lesions located anterior to the medulla oblongata; the complete transcondylar approach (CTCA), to treat 13 extradural lesions that involved the lower clivus and anterior upper cervical spine; the extreme-lateral transjugular approach, to treat 14 jugular foramen tumors; and the transtubercular approach with or without division of the sigmoid sinus, to treat complex VA and vertebrobasilar junction aneurysms. An anatomical prosection was performed to study the surgical exposure of each of the six variations of the extreme-lateral craniocervical approach. Total removal was achieved in 35 (69%) of the patients with tumor; subtotal resection was achieved in 16 (31%) of those patients. In the 12 patients with VA aneurysms, seven underwent clipping, three underwent trapping and a vein graft bypass procedure, and two underwent trapping without the use of a bypass procedure. In five other patients, different cystic, inflammatory, and other vascular lesions were successfully treated. Fifty percent of the patients who underwent surgery via the TFA, 83% via the of the CTCA, and 11% via the PTCA required an occipitocervical fusion procedure. The mean Karnofsky Performance Scale score was 74.7 preoperatively and 76.4 postoperatively. Major complications were hydrocephalus (nine patients), cerebrospinal fluid leakage (seven patients), worsened cranial nerve function (seven patients), vertebrobasilar vasospasm (one patient), and sigmoid sinus thrombosis (one patient). CONCLUSIONS: To treat lesions in the region of the foramen magnum and surrounding areas, the approach should be tailored to each specific lesion to provide the needed exposure without unnecessary operative steps.