OBJECTIVE AND IMPORTANCE: Although conventional superselective chemical thrombolysis is frequently successful for the treatment of severe acute dural sinus thrombosis, the technique has limitations and risks. This prompted us to develop a supplemental technique for achieving more rapid recanalization, using coronary microballoon percutaneous transluminal angioplasty catheters. We describe a successful application of this technique and technology that has not been previously reported. CLINICAL PRESENTATION: After several days of severe headaches, photophobia, and vomiting, a 29-year-old woman presented with rapidly progressive neurological deficits secondary to complete occlusion of the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) and right transverse/sigmoid sinus complex. Owing to her rapid neurological decline, she was referred for emergency endovascular intervention. TECHNIQUE: Initially, superselective chemical thrombolysis of the SSS was performed using urokinase. However, because of the extensive nature of the thrombus and lack of initial therapeutic response, we elected to attempt mechanical thrombolysis with various coronary percutaneous transluminal angioplasty microballoon catheters. This was accomplished by initial coaxial positioning of the device into an occluded segment, followed by gentle inflation and retraction of the device along the course of the right transverse sinus and/or SSS. These maneuvers were repeated with balloons of increasingly large diameter. Near-complete restoration of venous outflow was obtained within the SSS with preferential runoff into the left transverse sinus. The right transverse sinus was only partially recanalized. Despite the patient's rapid neurological decline on presentation, she experienced a dramatic clinical recovery with near-complete reversal of neurological deficits within 24 hours of intervention. CONCLUSION: This report shows the feasibility of performing safe and effective mechanical thrombolysis with percutaneous transluminal angioplasty coronary balloon microcatheters within the major dural sinuses. This technique can probably accelerate clot disruption and thrombolysis, possibly resulting in a more rapid restoration of venous flow.