Medical information for the general public, patients and their families is a current Public Health priority. What information can be given to a patient suffering from schizophrenia, whose understanding and judgement capacities are supposedly affected by this mental disease? In the United States, 70% of psychiatrists inform patients of schizophrenia and diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder, while in Japan less than 30% do this. The lack of information given to the general public on the disease may contribute to reinforcing the difficulty in announcing the diagnosis. Indeed, the beliefs and attitudes of the patient, his/her family, the general population and health carers concerning the disease do not match up. However, the first two years seem to be a main issue for the subsequent evolution of the disease. No specific data on the attitude of French clinicians with respect to the announcement of the diagnosis is available. In the current legal context and in view of the advances in treatment, we have carried out a survey among French psychiatrists. It is an auto-questionnaire, transversal epidemiological, descriptive and analytical. The questionnaire was sent to a population of 12,958 psychiatrists. It comprised 48 questions: 7 referred to the socio-demographic and professional characteristics of the subjects, 22 to the attitude with respect to the announcement of the diagnosis to the patients, and the last 18 concerned the attitude with respect to the announcement of the diagnosis to the families. 1,691 questionnaires were returned by free post and analysed. The socio-demographic characteristics of the sample are close to those of French psychiatrists as a whole. The number of patients suffering from schizophrenia in the active files of the psychiatrists is 24% (+/- 21.4) on the entire sample. Approximately a third (37.8%) of psychiatrists deem it necessary to announce the schizophrenia diagnosis and approximately two thirds (69.5%) declare that they sometimes announce it. Among the patients suffering from schizophrenia in the active files of the psychiatrists who responded, approximately a third (34%) were informed of their diagnosis. The main reasons for not announcing the diagnosis are firstly the "reticence to give a diagnosis label" and secondly "the functional incapacity of the patient to understand the concept". The alternative diagnosis term most commonly used is "psychosis" (46.5%). However, 48.1% of practitioners state that the announcement of a specific diagnosis allows a better therapeutic combination. Depending on the proportion of patients suffering from schizophrenia in their active file presented in two categories (< 10% and > 10%), psychiatrists significantly most frequently announce the specific diagnosis (17.3% vs 25.3%, p < 10(-3). A statistically significant proportion of younger psychiatrists (44.4 vs 46.3, p < 10(-3) with fewer years of practice (14.1 vs 15.8), more often believe that it is necessary to announce the diagnosis. The rate of response (13.5%) for this type of survey seems high, which could indicate a high interest among psychiatrists with respect to this question. Our data showed the existence of a correlation between age, number of years in practice, type of practice and the proportion of patients suffering from schizophrenia in the active file on the one hand and the attitude of the psychiatrists with respect to the announcement of the diagnosis on the other hand. It is possible that the multi-disciplinary team work of public practice psychiatrists and the fact that they are more often confronted with schizophrenic disease facilitate the announcement of this diagnosis. In the survey population, the inability to give a diagnosis may be related to the questions of the practitioners about the capacity of the subjects to understand, the lack of precision of this diagnosis, the fear of disheartening the patients and the absence of curative treatment. The risk of suicide does not seem to be one