Clinical and imaging data suggest that Behçet's disease (BD) can present with a variety of neurologic complications, which may be subclassified into two forms. One is attributable to small venous inflammatory disease with focal or multifocal central nervous system involvement and is seen in the majority of patients. It is designated Central Nervous System-Neuro-Behçet syndrome (CNS-NBS). The other form is due to cerebral venous sinus thrombosis and has limited symptoms and a better prognosis. It is very uncommon for these two types of involvement to occur in the same individual. It is very likely that the two major forms have different pathogeneses. Patients with small vein inflammation should be considered for aggressive treatment. A substantial number of patients in this group will have a relapsing-remitting course; for some, this will evolve into a secondary progressive course. A few patients from this group will have progressive CNS dysfunction from the onset. Acute attacks of CNS-NBS are treated with either oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/d up to 4 weeks or until improvement is observed) or high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP), 1 g/d for 5 to 7 days. After either treatment, an oral tapering dose of glucocorticoids should be given over 2 to 3 months to avoid early relapses. Some patients may require the long-term use of low maintenance doses of glucocorticoids to prevent exacerbations. Immunosuppressive agents (eg, azathioprine, cyclosporine A, cyclophosphamide, and chlorambucil), given either alone or in different combinations (eg, azathioprine with cyclosporine) for the long-term treatment of various systemic manifestations of BD, have not been shown to prevent the development of the neurologic complications of the disease, reduce its exacerbations, or stop its progression. Immunomodulatory treatments such as interferon alfa and thalidomide have been shown to be effective in treating some of the systemic manifestations of BD, but there is no information on their effects on the development and progression of CNS-NBS. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis in BD is treated with either intravenous unfractionated heparin or subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin given together with a short course of glucocorticoids. Evidence of benefit from this treatment, however, is weak.