BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The pathophysiology of sinus vein thrombosis (SVT) is still controversial in patients and experimental animals, the microcirculatory alterations in particular. This study was designed to develop a new sinus vein thrombosis model and to further elucidate pathophysiological events such as the relationship between local and regional cerebral blood flow and haemoglobin oxygen saturation (HbSO2), changes of the microvasculature, leukocyte behaviour and brain tissue damage. METHODS: In a first experimental series, animals were divided into two groups which resulted from different procedures of inducing SVT. In the SSS middle occlusion group (SMO group), SVT was induced by the ligation of the superior sagittal sinus right in the middle between the bregma and the confluence sinum. In the SSS posterior occlusion group (SPO group) the ligation was performed close to the confluence sinum. Regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was assessed at 36 identical locations by laser Doppler flowmetry together with regional haemoglobin oxygen saturation (HbSO2). In a second series of experiments SVT was induced by ligation of the SSS close to the confluence sinum (SVT group) to study effects on the cortical microcirculation. A sham operation was performed in six animals (sham group). In both groups, an intravital microscopic double tracing technique was utilised for evaluating microvessel structures and leukocyte behaviour. The images were recorded on videotape for evaluating alterations of microvessel (venules, arterioles and capillaries) diameters and numbers of leukocyte rollers and stickers by a digital video analyser. Animals were sacrificed for histological evaluation after 5 days. RESULTS: The posterior sinus ligation caused a significant decrease of rCBF and HbSO2 and brain tissue damage which was not seen in the SMO group. Alteration of rCBF and HbSO2 were positively correlated with infarct size in the SPO group only, where venous infarction was easily reproduced. Therefore, it is suggested that this model is suitable for studying SVT in Mongolian gerbils. Intravital microscopy of the cortical microcirculation revealed no significant changes of vessels diameter in the sham group, whereas a significant dilation of veins and capillaries was seen in the SVT group. Numbers of leukocyte rollers and stickers were positively correlated with infarct size. CONCLUSION: Microcirculatory alterations and brain tissue damage from SVT in the Mongolian gerbil depend on the SSS occlusion site. The newly established mongolian gerbil sinus-vein thrombosis model has advantages compared to previously reported sinus-vein thrombosis models such as easy handling, easy technique, highly reproducibility, and good observation of microcirculatory event. The model allows for studies of cerebral low-flow conditions such as expected to occur in an ischaemic penumbra zone.