Pain therapy with epidural or intrathecal catheters is an invasive method. These techniques have specific indications in both acute and chronic pain therapy. However, complications can occur. Thus, the potential complications and the therapy necessary must be known.Drugs: Complications resulting from acute local anesthetic intoxication's are rare. High plasma levels during chronic therapy may lead to confusion. Respiratory depression can occur in opioid naive patients up to 12 (-24) h after injection. Adequate monitoring is a prerequisite for this therapy. After application of clonidine, hypotension is frequent in hypertonic and hypovolemic patients. Epidural or intrathecalcatheter placement can result in therapeutic failure, trauma by punction and inability to place the catheter. During chronic therapy, technical problems can occur, e.g., dislocation, occlusion. To exclude intrathecal and intravascular placement, application of a test dosage of a local anesthetic with adrenaline is recommended.Neurological complications can result in nerve root deficit or "simple" post-spinal headache, but cauda equina syndromes, paralyses, intracranial bleeding, sinus thrombosis and central neurological deficits have been reported. Skininfection at the insertion site of the catheter has been observed with an incidence of 1.9 to 7.7%. A spinal infection with neurological deficit is rare. Spinal infections are often associated with other diseases. Spinalhematomas are rare. Coagulation disorders and anticoagulants can lead to bleeding. Intravenous heparin should be avoided, because this is frequently associated with spinal bleeding. Therapy with cumarines is a contraindication for insertion of spinal catheters.Monitoring: During treatment with spinal catheters, adequate monitoring increases safety for the patients. Efficacy of the injections, puncture site and the neurological status should be documented daily. Neurological deficits must be diagnosed without losing time and adequate therapy must be initiated.