BACKGROUND: Subperiosteal inflammatory disease, subperiosteal abscess and orbital cellulitis are the most common sequelae of both acute and chronic sinusitis. Early, appropriate evaluation and management observing signs and symptoms of orbital inflammation are required to prevent blindness. Computerised tomography (CT) is the investigation of choice in diagnosing the discussed pathological conditions. Cellulitis does not require drainage of the orbit on a routine basis. Conventionally, the orbital abscess is drained via an external incision and sinus surgery is performed at the same time to remove the focus of infection. More recently, successful treatment both of the sinuses and decompression of the orbit has been accomplished endoscopically via an intranasal approach. Aim: The aim of the paper was to analyse the results of intranasal endoscopic procedures performed in individuals with orbital complications of sinusitis in search for optimal treatment of this group of patients. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Records of 7 patients aged from 14 to 68 (mean 33) years treated in our department for orbital complications of sinusitis between February 2005 and August 2006 were analysed retrospectively. One retrobulbar abscess was diagnosed. In the remaining 6 patients the diagnosis of cellulitis, in one case complicated with cavernous sinus thrombosis, was established. 7 endoscopic frontosphenoethmoidectomies, one with endonasal decompression of the orbital abscess, were performed. RESULTS: All preoperative symptoms subsided in all operated individuals. No complications were observed. CONCLUSIONS: Surgical treatment of the focus of infection in the sinuses and drainage of orbital abscess can be accomplished endoscopically via an intranasal approach with little morbidity, easy identification of anatomical structures, physiological drainage of the sinuses and superior cosmetic result. Our experience suggests that the optimal method of treatment consists in surgical endoscopic removal of the focus of infection located in the sinuses with simultaneous drainage of the abscess in the orbit.