 BACKGROUND: Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) is a rare stroke subtype, which has many overlapping symptoms with non-thrombotic cerebral venous sinus stenosis (CVSS) in the acute phase. Despite these similarities, their therapeutic regimens and outcomes are entirely different, and treatment delay is life-threatening. This study aims to address their clinical differences to help promote proper patient care. METHODS: 34 cases of CVST and 34 cases of non-thrombotic CVSS diagnosed with digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in the acute phase (symptoms onset within 7days) were consecutively enrolled in this prospective non-randomized and controlled study. Differences between CVST and CVSS in their clinical manifestation, plasma biomarkers, and MR or DSA imaging were compared. RESULTS: CVST and CVSS overlap in many ways, but differ in their respective medical histories and neurological deficits. However, 20.6% of CVST and 64.7% of CVSS occur without a definitive medical history, and 70.6% of CVST and 64.7% of CVSS occur without focal neurologic deficits. In the acute phase of CVST, d-dimer and fibrinogen are found to be abnormally elevated in 94.1% and 73.5% of cases, respectively. In the CVSS group, d-dimer and fibrinogen are only elevated in 17.6% and 5.9% of cases, respectively (binary logistic regressions test, all P<0.001). In the CVST group, the predominant features in MRI/MRV and DSA imaging include local brain lesions, flow void signal loss, non-visualization, and a local filling defect sign at the involved sinus. Conversely, in the CVSS group, imaging revealed symmetrically small bilateral ventricles and the spread of cerebral edema in MRI/MRV. DSA imaging in the CVSS group revealed external compression and a narrow sinus with disproportionate venous engorgement. Despite these findings, positive imaging only appears in a minority of patients in the two groups during the acute phase (Table 4). CONCLUSIONS: DSA may be beneficial to diagnose CVST in ambiguous patients suspected to have either CVST or CVSS. Clinically useful biomarkers (d-dimer and fibrinogen) may predict CVST in the emergency room in the ambiguous patients with or without equivocal MRI/MRV imaging.