PURPOSE: To determine the imaging appearance and frequency with which arachnoid granulations are seen on contrast-enhanced CT and MR studies of the brain. METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 573 contrast-enhanced CT scans and 100 contrast-enhanced MR studies of the brain for the presence of discrete filling defects within the venous sinuses. An anatomic study of the dural sinuses of 29 cadavers was performed, and the location, appearance, and histologic findings of focal protrusions into the dural sinus lumen (arachnoid granulations) were assessed and compared with the imaging findings. RESULTS: Discrete filling defects within the dural sinuses were found on 138 (24%) of the contrast-enhanced CT examinations. A total of 168 defects were found, the majority (92%) within the transverse sinuses. One third were isodense and two thirds were hypodense relative to brain parenchyma. Patients with filling defects were older than patients without filling defects (mean age, 46 years versus 40 years). Discrete intrasinus signal foci were noted on 13 (13%) of the contrast-enhanced MR studies. The foci followed the same distribution as the filling defects seen on CT scans and were isointense to hypointense on T1-weighted images, variable in signal on balanced images, and hyperintense on T2-weighted images. Transverse sinus arachnoid granulations were noted adjacent to venous entrance sites in 62% and 85% of the CT and MR examinations, respectively. Arachnoid granulations were found in 19 (66%) of the cadaveric specimens, in a similar distribution as that seen on the imaging studies. CONCLUSION: Discrete filling defects, consistent with arachnoid granulations, may be seen in the dural sinuses on 24% of contrast-enhanced CT scans and on 13% of MR studies. They are focal, well-defined, and typically located within the lateral transverse sinuses adjacent to venous entrance sites. They should not be mistaken for sinus thrombosis or intrasinus tumor, but recognized as normal structures.