Idiopathic intracranial hypertension is a disorder of intracerebral pressure regulation and patients run the risk of permanent visual loss. Intracranial hypertension (IH) has been reported rarely in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We reviewed the medical records of 127 patients with lupus nephritis (LN) who were followed up from 1987 to 1996 in our unit. There were six patients with IH which gave a disease prevalence of 4.7% in those with LN. All were females giving a disease prevalence of 5.2% for that sex, a high rate of occurrence of IH in patients with LN. Their age ranged from 22 to 34 y (27.8 +/- 3.6 y). Headache, vomiting and diplopia were the common presenting symptoms and had started 7.3 +/- 4.4 weeks prior to the diagnosis of IH. The cerebrospinal (CSF) opening pressure (413.3 +/- 77.0 mmH2O) was raised in all cases. Biochemical and cytological analyses of CSF were normal. The only abnormal radiological finding was partially empty sella in one patient on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (performed in three patients) or computed tomography (CT) (performed in all patients). All patients had serological evidences of active lupus disease at the time of diagnosis of IH. The renal histology was WHO type IV in four cases and III and V in one each indicating severe renal involvement. Laboratory evidences of procoagulant activity were found in the form of positive anticardiolipin antibody (aCL) in two patients, lupus anticoagulant (LA) in two and an otherwise unexplained isolated prolongation of activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) in the other two. Clinically, one or more episodes of symptomatic venous or arterial thrombosis had occurred in all subjects. In addition to symptomatic measures, all subjects were treated with prednisolone, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide and plasmapheresis according to the protocol of our unit. One patient who did not receive plasmapheresis and cyclophosphamide had a relapse while all others recovered completely. None received anticoagulant therapy. Young females with serologically active lupus, severe forms of renal lesions, past history of venous or arterial thrombosis and laboratory evidences of procoagulant activity, appear to be at increased risk of IH. Thrombotic occlusion of the cerebral arteriolar or venous vascular bed eventually affecting the arachnoid villi and impeding CSF absorption is favoured compared to cerebral venous or sinus thrombosis as the pathogenic mechanism. Combined immunosuppression and plasmapheresis appeared to be beneficial in short and long term follow-up. We propose that patients with SLE and IH have definable risk and pathogenetic factors and are no more to be considered 'idiopathic'. The conditions calls for aggressive intervention which leads to an excellent outcome.