PURPOSE: In autopsy reports of patients who died of septic cavernous sinus thrombosis, tributary venosinus occlusion has been a common finding related to intracranial inflammatory complications. The purpose of this article is to illustrate the MR and CT appearance of septic cavernous sinus thrombosis and tributary venous occlusion. METHODS: Over a period of 7 years, eight patients with septic cavernous sinus thrombosis were examined by contrast-enhanced thin-section CT. The CT scans of these eight patients and those of 30 healthy control subjects were assessed independently and subjectively by two blinded readers to ascertain the presence, size, and density of areas of nonopacification within the cavernous sinus and the presence of filling defects and dilation of tributary veins and venous sinuses. In six subjects, MR images supplemented by a contrast-enhanced spoiled gradient-recalled acquisition in the steady state (SPGR) sequence were assessed with respect to the presence of filling defects, expansion, and signal abnormalities within the cavernous sinus and tributary veins and sinuses. The MR and CT findings were compared. RESULTS: The CT studies of the eight patients were consistently differentiated from those of the control subjects by the two readers. Contrast-enhanced CT findings in patients included areas of nonopacification that were present within the cavernous sinus bilaterally in six cases and unilaterally in two. The size of the filling defects exceeded 7 mm in 76% of thrombosed cavernous sinuses compared with 9% of control subjects. The mean density of filling defects in patients differed significantly from those in control subjects. Comparison of the MR and CT findings in six cases showed the contrast-enhanced SPGR sequence to be equivalent to CT with respect to delineation of filling defects. CONCLUSION: Contrast-enhanced high-resolution CT findings indicate that venosinus thrombosis associated with septic cavernous sinus thrombosis is not restricted to the superior ophthalmic vein and is more common than previously assumed. A contrast-enhanced SPGR MR sequence may be used as a reliable alternative to establish the diagnosis of cavernous sinus and tributary venosinus thrombosis.