 BACKGROUND: Tako-tsubo (stress) cardiomyopathy (TTC) is a recently described acute cardiac syndrome that mimics ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. The TTC Tuscany Registry is an observational prospective multicenter registry established to define the prevalence, epidemiology and prognosis of TTC in the Tuscany area. METHODS: From January 1 to December 31, 2009, 105 consecutive patients hospitalized in the 14 Cardiology Units of the Tuscany Region with a diagnosis of TTC, were enrolled in the registry. TTC diagnosis was made using the Mayo Clinic modified criteria. Clinical, instrumental, laboratory and 6-month follow-up data were collected. Results. TTC represented 1.2% of all myocardial infarctions in the Tuscany Region during 2009, and it was diagnosed in 0.6% of the angiographic exams performed during the same year. The data collected showed that TTC affects mainly the female gender (91%) in the post-menopausal period (70 ± 11 years), though 5% of patients were ≤50 years old. An antecedent stressful event was frequently detected (74%). The main clinical presentation was chest pain (86%), associated with ST-segment elevation (59%). Mean left ventricular ejection fraction on admission was 40 ± 9%, and was associated with apical (37%), midapical (49%) or midventricular (5%) wall motion abnormalities. Left ventricular ejection fraction recovered to 51 ± 9% in 7 ± 9 days. Heart failure was the most common complication in the acute phase (14%), and 4 patients presented with cardiogenic shock. No patient died during the index hospitalization. At 6-month follow-up, no patient had TTC recurrence, 9 patients were rehospitalized (7 for noncardiac disease) and 2 patients died of noncardiac causes. CONCLUSIONS: Our data, which represent the largest prospective series of patients with a diagnosis of TTC, show that the prevalence of TTC in Tuscany is similar that described in other national and international studies. Moreover, the data highlight that TTC may occur also in male patients and in patients aged <50 years. The mid-term prognosis is good, but the risk of acute complications related to heart failure cannot be neglected.