We read with great interest the article by Kalra et al.(1) titled "Antitachycardia pacing reduces appropriate and inappropriate shocks in children and congenital heart disease patients" recently published in HeartRhythm. In this study, authors retrospectively reviewed the efficacy of antitachycardia pacing (ATP) in children and patients with congenital heart diseases (CHD), primary electrical diseases and selected cardiomyopathies. Although authors did not report the generalized estimated equation-adjusted efficacy of ATP (as usually performed in such studies), the unadjusted efficacy was as high as 88%. Regarding the programming, 8-pulses burst at 88% of the ventricular tachycardia cycle length with multiple sequences were programmed (from 2 to 6 sequences). Interestingly, authors report that the majority of episodes were terminated with one or 2 attempts, but that 3 episodes were terminated by the 4(th), the 5(th) and the 8(th) sequence. Despite delaying the successful therapy, those episodes were not symptomatic. Study findings raise some key points regarding adequate number of ATP sequences to program in this selected population, which led us to write this letter. We recently published a study demonstrating the safety and efficacy of programming more than the usual 1 or 2 ATP attempts (10 sequences programmed in our study) for patients implanted for coronary artery diseases and dilated cardiomyopathies(2). Although the majority of episodes were terminated by the first or the second attempt, a high proportion of patients had at least one episode treated by three or more ATP attempts, and would have experienced painful shocks if less sequences would have been programmed. The benefit of such strategy was clear up to the 5(th) attempt. Although our study focused in adult patients with ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathies, we would like to emphasize the fact that in a selected pediatric population with CHD, overt cardiomyopathies, and for those with a secondary prevention indication, one should not be frightened of programming more than the usual 1 or 2 ATP attempts. Patients with primary electrical diseases had 0% ATP efficacy in the Kalra et al. study(1), and should not be considered as good candidates for aggressive ATP programming.