 DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: IRF6-related disorders span a spectrum from isolated cleft lip and palate and Van der Woude syndrome (VWS) at the mild end to popliteal pterygium syndrome (PPS) at the more severe end. Individuals with VWS show one or more of the following anomalies: (1) congenital, usually bilateral, paramedian lower-lip fistulae (pits) or sometimes small mounds with a sinus tract leading from a mucous gland of the lip; (2) cleft lip (CL); or (3) cleft palate (CP). Both cleft types — cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL±P) and CP only — occur in individuals with VWS in the same proportions as in the general population, about two to one respectively. The PPS phenotype includes CL±P, fistulae of the lower lip, webbing of the skin extending from the ischial tuberosities to the heels, bifid scrotum and cryptorchidism in males, hypoplasia of the labia majora in females, syndactyly of fingers and/or toes, and anomalies of the skin around the nails. Filiform synechiae may connect the upper and lower jaws (syngnathia) or the upper and lower eyelids (ankyloblepharon). A characteristic pyramidal fold of skin overlying the nail of the hallux is almost pathognomonic. In both phenotypes, growth and intelligence are normal. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Diagnosis is based on clinical findings. Mutations in IRF6 are known to be associated with IRF6-related disorders. Genetic variants in IRF6 contribute risk for isolated cleft lip and palate. Sequence analysis of the IRF6 coding region (exons 1-9) detects mutations in approximately 70% of individuals with the Van der Woude syndrome phenotype and approximately 97% of individuals with the popliteal pterygium syndrome phenotype. Such testing is clinically available.  MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive/symptomatic treatment may include surgery, orthodontia, speech therapy, feeding and hearing evaluation, physical therapy, and orthopedic care.  GENETIC COUNSELING: IRF6-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most individuals diagnosed with an IRF6-related disorder have an affected parent; however, penetrance is incomplete and de novo mutations have been reported. The risk to the sibs of the proband depends on the genetic status of the proband's parents. If a parent of the proband is affected or has an IRF6 mutation, the risk to the sibs of inheriting the mutation is 50%. Prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the disease-causing allele in the family member is known. Prenatal ultrasound examination may detect a cleft lip in some fetuses later in pregnancy, but it is less likely to detect a cleft palate or lip pits.